

ADVENTURE (from Lat. res adventura, a thing about to 
happen), chance, and especially chance of danger ; so a hazard- 
ous enterprise or remarkable incident. Thus an " adventurer," 
from meaning one who takes part in some speculative course of 
action, came to mean one who lived by his wits and a person of 
no character. The word is also used in certain restricted legal 
connexions. Joint adventure, for instance, may be distinguished 
from partnership (q.v.). A bill of adventure in maritime law (now 
apparently obsolete) is a writing signed by the shipmaster de- 
claring that goods shipped in his name really belong to another, 
to whom he is responsible. The bill of gross adventure in French 
maritime law is an instrument making a loan on maritime 
security. 

ADVERTISEMENT, or Advertising (Fr. avertissement, warn- 
ing, or notice), the process of obtaining and particularly of 
purchasing publicity. The business of advertising is of very 
recent origin if it be regarded as a serious adjunct to other phases 
of commercial activity. In some rudimentary form the seller's 
appeal to the buyer must, however, have accompanied the earliest 
development of trade. Under conditions of primitive barter, 
communities were so small that every producer was in immediate 
personal contact with every consumer. As the primeval man's 
wolfish antipathy to the stranger of another pack gradually 
diminished, and as intercourse spread the infection of larger 
desires, the trapper could no longer satisfy his more complicated 
wants by the mere exchange of his pelts for his lowland neigh- 
bour's corn and oil. A began to accept from B the commodity 
which he could in turn deliver to C, while C in exchange for B's 
product gave to A what D had produced and bartered to C. The 
mere statement of such a transaction sufficiently presents its 
clumsiness, and the use of primitive forms of coin soon simplified 
the original process of bare barter. It is reasonable to suppose 
that as soon as the introduction of currency marked the abandon- 
ment of direct relations between purchaser and consumer an 
informal system of advertisement in turn rose to meet the need 
of publicity. At first the offer of the producer must have been 
brought to the trader's attention, and the trader's offer to the 
notice of the consumer, by casual personal contact, supplemented 
by local rumour. The gradual growth of markets and their de- 
velopment into periodical fairs, to which merchants from dis- 
tant places resorted, afforded, until printing was invented, the 
only means of extended advertisement. In England, during the 
3rd century, Stourbridge Fair attracted traders from abroad as 
well as from all parts of England, and it may be conjectured that 
the crying of wares before the booths on the banks of the Stour 



236 



ADVERTISEMENT 



was the first form of advertisement which had any marked effect 
upon English commerce. As the fairs of the middle ages, with 
the tedious and hazardous journeys they involved, gradually 
gave place to a more convenient system of trade, the 15th century 
brought the invention of printing, and led the way to the modern 
development of advertising. The Americans, to whom the elab- 
oration of newspaper advertising is primarily due, had but just 
founded the first English-speaking community in the western 
hemisphere when the first newspaper was published in England. 
But although the first periodical publication containing news 
appeared in the month of May 1622, the first newspaper advert- 
isement does not seem to have been published until April 1647. 
It formed a part of No. 13 of Perfect Occurrences of Every Dale 
journall in Parliament, and other Moderate Intelligence, and it read 
as follows : — 

A Book applauded by the Clergy of England, called The Divine 
Right of Church Government, Collected by sundry eminent Ministers 
in the Citie of London; Corrected and augmented in many places, 
with a briefe Reply to certain Queries against the Mimstery of 
England; Is printed and published for Joseph Hunscot and George 
Calvert, and are to be sold at the Stationers' Hall, and at the Golden 
Fleece in the Old Change. 

Among the Mercuries, -as the weekly newspapers of the day 
were called, was the Mercurius Elencticus, and in its 45th number, 
published on the 4th of October 1648, there appeared the fol- 
lowing advertisement: — 

The Reader is desired to peruse a Sermon, 
Entituled A Looking-Glasse for Levellers, 
Preached at St. Peters, Paules Wharf, on Sunday, Sept. 24th 1648, 
by Paul Knell, Mr. of Arts. Another Tract called A Reflex 
upon our Reformers, with a prayer for the Parliament. 

In an issue of the Mercurius Politicus, published by Marchmont 
Nedham, who is described as " perhaps both the ablest and the 
readiest man that had yet tried his hand at a newspaper," there 
appeared in January 1652 an advertisement, which has often 
been erroneously cited as the first among newspaper advertise- 
ments. It read as follows: — ■ 

Irenodia Gratulatoria, a heroic poem, being a congratulatory 
panegyrick for my Lord General's return, summing up his suc- 
cesses in an exquisite manner. To be sold by John Holden, in the 
New Exchange, London, Printed by Thomas Newcourt, 1652. 

The article " On the Advertising System," published in the 
Edinburgh Review for February 1843, contains the fullest account 
of early English advertising that has ever been given, and it has 
been very freely drawn upon by all writers who have since dis- 
cussed the subject. But it describes this advertisement in the 
Mercurius Politicus as " the very first," and the discovery of the 
two earlier instances above quoted was due to the researches of 
a contributor to Notes and Queries. 

In The Crosby Records, the commonplace-books of William 
Blundell, there is an interesting comment, dated 1659, on the 
lack of advertising facilities at that period — 

It would be very expedient if each parish or village might have 
some place, as the church or smithy, wherein to publish (by papers 
posted up) the wants either of the buyer or the seller, as such a 
field to be let, such a servant, or such a service, to be had, &c. 
There was a book published in London weekly about the year 
1657 which was called (as I remember) The Publick Advice. It gave 
information in very many of these particulars. 

A year later the same diarist says — 

There is an office near the Old Exchange in London called the 
office of Publick Advice. From thence both printed and private 
information of this useful nature are always to be had. But what 
they print is no more than a leaf or less in a diurnal. I was in this 
office. The diurnal consisted of sixteen pages quarto in 1689. 

In No. 62 of the London Gazette, published in June 1666, the 
first advertisement supplement was announced — 

An Advertisement— Being daily prest to the Publication of 
Books, Medicines, and other things not properly the business of a 
Paper of Intelligence, This is to notifie, once for all, that we will not 
charge the Gazette with Advertisements, unless they be matter of 
State : but that a Paper of Advertisements will be forthwith printed 
apart, & recommended to the Publick by another hand. 

In No. 94 of the same journal, published in October 1666, 
there appeared a suggestion that sufferers from the Great Fire 
should avail themselves of this means of publicity — 

Such as have settled in new habitations since the late Fire, and 
desire for the convenience of their correspondence to publish the 
place of their present abode, or to give notice of Goods lost or found 



may repair to the corner House in Bloomsbury on the East Side of 
the Great Square, before the House of the Right Honourable the 
Lord Treasurer, where there is care taken for the Receipt and 
Publication of such Advertisements. 

The earlier advertisements, with the exception of formal 
notices, seem to have been concerned exclusively with either 
books or quack remedies. The first trade advertisement, which 
does not fall within either of these categories, was curiously 
enough the first advertisement of a new commodity, tea. The 
following advertisement appeared in the Mercurius Politicus, 
No. 435, for September 1658 — 

That excellent and by all Physitians approved China Drink, called 
by the Chineans Tcha, by other nations Tay, alias Tee, is sold at the 
Sultaness Head, a cophee-house in Sweetings Rents, by the Royal 
Exchange, London. 

The history of slavery, of privateering and of many other 
curious incidents and episodes of English history during the 17th 
and 18th centuries might be traced by examination of the anti- 
quated advertisements which writers upon such subjects have 
already collected. In order that space may be found for some 
consideration of the practical aspects of modern advertising, the 
discussion of its gradual development must be curtailed. Nor 
is it necessary to preface this consideration by any laboured 
statement of the importance which advertising has assumed. 

It is a matter of common knowledge that several business 
houses are to be found in Great Britain, and a larger number 
in the United States, who spend not less than £50,000 a year in 
advertising, while one patent medicine company, operating both 
in England and the United States, has probably spent not less 
than £200,000 in Great Britain in one year, and an English cocoa 
manufacturer is supposed to have spent £150,000 in Great 
Britain. Some of the best works of artists as distinguished as 
Sir John Millais, Sir H. von Herkomer and Mr Stacy Marks have 
been scattered broadcast by advertisers. The purchase of Sir 
John Millais' picture " Bubbles " for £2200 by the proprietors 
of a well-known brand of soap is probably the most remarkable 
instance of the expenditure in this direction which an advertiser 
may find profitable. There are in London alone more than 350 
advertising agents, of whom upwards of a hundred are known 
as men in a considerable way of business. The statements which 
from time to time find currency in the newspapers with regard 
to the total amount of money annually spent upon advertising 
in Great Britain and in the United States are necessarily no better 
than conjectures, but no detailed statistics are required in order 
to demonstrate what every reader can plainly see for himself, 
that advertising has definitely assumed its position as a serious 
field of commercial enterprise. 

Advertising, as practised at the beginning of the 20th century, 
may be divided into three general classes: — 

1. Advertising in periodical publications. 

2. Advertising by posters, signboards (other than those placed 
upon premises where the advertised business is conducted), 
transparencies and similar devices, 

3. Circulars, sent in quantities to specific classes of persons to 
whom the advertiser specially desired to address himself. 

It may be noted at the outset that advertising in periodical 
publications exercises a reflex influence upon these publications. 
The daily, weekly and monthly publications of the day are accus- 
tomed to look to advertisements for so large a part of their 
revenue that the purchaser of a periodical publication receives 
much greater value for his money than he could reasonably expect 
from the publisher if the aggregate advertising receipts did not 
constitute a perpetual subsidy to the publisher. It is not to be 
supposed, however, that the receipts from the sale of a paper 
cover all its expenses and that the advertising revenue is all clear 
profit. The average newspaper reader would be amazed if he 
knew at how great a cost the day's news is laid before him. A 
dignified journal displays no inclination to cry from the house- 
tops the vastness of its expenditure, but from time to time an 
accident enables the public to obtain information in this con- 
nexion. The evidence taken by a recent Copyright Commission 
disclosed that the expenditure of the leading English journal 
upon foreign news alone amounted to more than £50,000 



ADVERTISEMENT 



^37 



in the course of one year, and that a year not characterized 
by any great war to swell the ordinary volume of cable 
despatches. 

In the case of daily papers sold at the minimum price, it is not 
less obvious that the costliness of news service renders advertising 
revenue indispensable, for although these less important journals 
spend less money, the price at which they are supplied to the 
news agents is very small in proportion to the cost of their pro- 
duction. If, however, this thought be pursued to its logical con- 
clusion, the advertiser must admit that he in turn receives, from 
those among newspaper readers who purchase his wares, prices 
sufficiently high to cover the cost of his advertising. So that the 
reader is in the curious position of directly paying a certain price 
for his newspaper, receiving a newspaper fairly worth more than 
that price, while this price is supplemented by the indirect in- 
cidence of a sort of tax upon many of the commodities he con- 
sumes. On the other hand, a great part of the advertisements 
in a daily newspaper have themselves an interest and utility not 
less than that possessed by the news. The man who desires to 
hire a house turns to the classified lists which the newspaper 
publishes day after day, and servants and employers find one 
another by the same means. The theatrical announcements are 
so much a part of the news that even if a journal were not paid 
for their insertion they could not be altogether omitted without 
inconvenience to the reader. In the main, however, it is the 
advertiser who seeks the reader, not the reader who seeks the 
advertiser, and the care with which advertisements are prepared, 
and the certainty with which the success or failure of a trader 
may be traced to his skill or want of skill as an advertiser, show 
that the proper use of advertising is one of the most indispensable 
branches of commercial training. 

Before discussing in detail the methods of advertising in 
periodical publications it may be well to complete, for the use 
Poster of the general reader, a brief survey of the whole 
and sign subject by examining the two other classes of advertise- 
advertlse- ment -fhe most enthusiastic partisan of advertising 
will admit that posters and similar devices are very 
generally regarded by the public as sources of annoyance. A 
bold headline or a conspicuous illustration in a newspaper 
advertisement may for a moment force itself upon the reader's 
attention. In the French, and in some English newspapers, 
where an advertisement is often given the form of an item of 
news, the reader is distressed by the constant fear of being 
hoodwinked. He begins to read an account of a street accident, 
and finds at the end of the paragraph a puff of a panacea for 
bruises. The best English and American journals have refused 
to lend themselves to this sort of trickery, and in no one of the 
best journals printed in the English language will there be found 
an advertisement which is not so plainly differentiated from news 
matter that the reader may avoid it if he sees fit to do so. On 
the whole, then, newspaper advertisements ask, but do not 
compel attention. The whole theory of poster advertising is, 
on the other hand, one of tyranny. The advertiser who pays 
for space upon a hoarding or wall, although he may encourage 
a form of art, deliberately violates the wayfarer's mind. A 
trade-mark or a catch-word presents itself when eye and thought 
are occupied with other subjects. Those who object to this class 
of advertisement assert, with some show of reason, that an 
advertisement has no more right to assault the eye in this fashion 
than to storm the ear by an inordinate din; and a man who 
came up behind another man in the street, placed his mouth 
close to the other's ear, and bawled a recommendation of some 
brand of soap or tobacco, would be regarded as an intolerable 
disturber of public peace and comfort. Yet if the owner of a 
house sees fit to paint advertisements upon his walls, his exercise 
of the jealously guarded rights of private property may not 
lightly be disturbed. For the most part, both law and public 
opinion content themselves with restraining the worst excesses 
of the advertiser, leaving many sensitive persons to suffer. 
. The National Society for Checking the Abuses of Public Adver- 
tising (known as Scapa), founded in 1803 in London, was organ- 
ized for purposes which it describes as follows: — 



The society aims at protecting the picturesque simplicity of rural 
and river scenery, and promoting a regard for dignity and propriety 
of aspect in towns — with especial reference to the abuses of spec- 
tacular advertising. 

It seeks to procure legislation whereby local representative bodies 
would be enabled to exercise control, by means of by-laws framed 
with a view to enabling them, at any rate, to grant relief in cases of 
flagrant and acknowledged abuse. 

It is believed that, when regulation is applied in cases where local 
conditions are peculiarly favourable, the advantage will be so 
apparent that, by force of imitation and competition, the enforce- 
ment of a reasonable standard will gradually become common. 
The degree of restraint will, of course, depend upon the varying 
requirements of different places and positions. No hard-and-fast 
rule is suggested ; no particular class of advertisement is proscribed ; 
certainly no general prohibition of posters on temporary hoardings 
is contemplated. Within the metropolitan area sky signs have 
already been prohibited, and it is hoped that some corresponding 
check will be placed on the multiplication of the field boards which 
so materially diminish the pleasure or comfort of railway journeys. 

The society regards with favour the imposition of a moderate tax 
or duty for imperial or local purposes on exposed advertisements 
not coming within certain categories of obviously necessary notices. 
The difficulty of inducing a chancellor of the exchequer to move in 
a matter where revenue is not the primary consideration is not over- 
looked. But it is thought that any impost would materially reduce 
the volume of exposed advertisements, and would at once extinguish 
the most offensive and the most annoying class, i.e. the quack ad- 
vertisements by the road sides and the bills stuck by unauthorized 
persons on trees, walls and palings. 

Members are recommended to make it known that there exists 
an active repugnance to the present practice of advertising disfigure- 
ment, by giving preference, in private transactions, to makers and 
dealers who do not employ objectionable methods, and by avoid- 
ing, as far as possible, the purchase of wares which, in their individual 
opinion, are offensively puffed. Action on these lines is advised 
rather for its educational than for its immediately deterrent effect; 
although, in the case of many of the more expensive commodities, 
makers would undoubtedly be much influenced by the knowledge 
that they would lose, rather than gain, custom. 

The foregoing proposals are based on the following estimate of 
the conditions of the problem. It is believed that the present 
licence causes discomfort or loss of enjoyment to many, and that, 
in the absence of authoritative restriction, it must grow far beyond 
its present limits; that beauty or propriety of aspect in town and 
country forms as real a part of the national wealth as any material 
product, and that to save these from impairment is a national 
interest; that the recent developments of vexatiously obtrusive 
advertising have not grown out of any necessities of honourable 
business, but are partly the result of a mere instinct of imitation, 
and partly are a morbid phase of competition by which both the 
consumers and the trade as a whole lose ; that restriction as regards 
the size and positions of advertising notices would not be a hardship 
to those who want publicity — since all competitors would be treated 
alike, each would have the same relative prominence ; that, as large 
sums of public money are expended on institutions intended to 
develop the finer taste, and on edifices of elaborate design, it must 
be held inconsistent with established public policy to permit the 
sensibilities thus imparted to be wounded, and architectural effect 
to be destroyed at the discretion of a limited class. 

The influence of this society is to be seen in many of the 
restrictions which have been imposed upon advertisers since its 
work began. About a year after its foundation the London 
County Council abolished (under statutory powers obtained 
from Parliament) advertisements coming within the definition 
of sky-signs in the London Building Act of 1894. These specifica- 
tions are as follows: — 

"Sky sign " means any word, letter, model, sign, device, or 
representation in the nature of an advertisement, announcement, 
or direction supported on or attached to any post, pole, standard, 
framework, or other support, wholly or in part upon, over, or above 
any building or structure, which, or any part of which, sky sign 
shall be visible against the sky from any point in any street or public 
way, and includes all and every part of any such post, pole, standard, 
framework, or other support. The expression " sky sign " shall also 
include any balloon, parachute, or similar device employed wholly 
or in part for the purposes of any advertisements or announcement 
on, over, or above any building, structure, or erection of any kind, 
or on or over any street or public way. 

The act proceeds to exclude from its restrictions flagstaffs, 
weathercocks and any solid signs not rising more than 3 fed 
above the roof. 

Another by-law of the London County Council, in great 
measure due to the observations made at coroners' inquests, 
protects the public against the annoyances and the perils to 



2 3 8 



ADVERTISEMENT 



traffic occasioned by flashlight and searchlight advertisements. 
This by-law reads as follows: — 

No person shall exhibit any flashlight so as to be visible from any 
street and to cause danger to the traffic therein, nor shall any owner 
or occupier of premises permit or suffer any flashlight to be so ex- 
hibited on such premises. 

The expression " flashlight " means and includes any light used 
for the purpose of illuminating, lighting, or exhibiting any word, 
letter, model, sign, device, or representation in the nature of an 
advertisement, announcement, or direction which alters suddenly 
either in intensity, colour, or direction. 

No person shall exhibit any searchlight so as to be visible from 
any street, and to cause danger to the traffic therein, nor shall any 
owner or occupier of premises permit or suffer any searchlight to 
be so exhibited on such premises. 

The _ expression "searchlight" means and includes any light 
exceeding 500-candle power, whether in one lamp or lantern, or in 
a series of lamps or lanterns used together and projected as one 
concentrated light, and which alters either in intensity, colour, or 
direction. 

Advertising vans were so troublesome in London as to be 
prohibited in 1853; the "sandwich-man" has in the City 
of London and many towns been ousted from the pavement 
to the gutter, from the more crowded to the less crowded 
streets, and as the traffic problem in the great centres of 
population becomes more urgent, he will probably be altogether 
suppressed. 

Hoardings are now so restricted by the London Building Acts 
that new hoarflings cannot, except under special conditions, 
be erected exceeding 12 feet in height, and no existing hoardings 
can be increased in height so as to exceed that limit. 

The huge signs which some advertisers, both in England 
and the United States, have placed in such positions as to 
mar the landscape, have so far aroused public antagonism 
that there is reason to hope that this form of nuisance will not 
increase. 

In 1899 Edinburgh obtained effective powers of control over 
all sorts of advertising in public places, and this achieve- 
ment has been followed by no little agitation in favour of a 
Parliamentary enactment which should once for all do away 
with the defacing of the landscape in any part of the United 
Kingdom. 

In 1907 an act was passed (Advertisements Regulation Act) 
of a permissive character purely, under which a local authority 
is enabled to make by-laws, subject to the confirmation of the 
Home Secretary, regulating (1) the erection of hoardings, &c, 
exceeding 12 feet in height, and (2) the exhibition of advertise- 
ments which might affect the " amenities " of a public place or 
landscape. 

The English law with regard to posters has undergone very 
little change. The Metropolitan Police Act 1839 (2 and 3 Vict, 
cap. 47) first put a stop to unauthorized posting, and the In- 
decent Advertisements Act of 1889 (§ 3) penalized the public 
exposure of any picture or printed or written matter of an in- 
decent or obscene nature. But in general practice there is 
hardly any limitation to the size or character of poster advertise- 
ments, other than good taste and public opinion. On the other 
hand, public opinion is a somewhat vague entity, and there 
have been cases in which a conflict has arisen as to what public 
opinion really was, when its legally authorized exponent was in 
a position to insist on its own arbitrary definition. Such an 
instance occurred some few years ago in the case of a large poster 
issued by a well-known London music-hall. The Progressive 
majority on the London County Council, led by Mr (afterwards 
Sir) J. M'Dougall, a well-known " purity " advocate, took 
exception to this poster, which represented a female gymnast in 
" tights " posed in what was doubtless intended for an alluring 
and attractive attitude; and, in spite of any argument, the fact 
remained that the decision as to renewing the licence of this 
music-hall rested solely with the Council. In showing that it 
would have no hesitation in provoking even a charge of meddling 
prudery, the Council probably gave a salutary warning to people 
who were inclined to sail rather too near the wind. But in 
Great Britain and America, at all events (though a doubt may 
perhaps exist as to some Continental countries!, the advertiser 



and the artist 1 are restrained, not only by their own sense of 
propriety, but by fear of offending the sense of propriety in their 
customers. 

Posters and placards in railway stations and upon public 
vehicles still embarrass the traveller who desires to find the 
name of a station or the destination of a vehicle. In respect of 
all these abuses it is a ^regrettable fact that unpopularity cannot 
be expected to deter the advertiser. If a name has once been 
fixed in the memory, it remains there long after the method of 
its impression has been forgotten, and the purpose of advertise- 
ments of the class under discussion is really no more than the 
fixing of a trade name in the mind. The average man or woman 
who goes into a shop to buy soap is more or less affected by 
a vague sense of antagonism towards the seller. There is a 
rudimentary feeling that even the most ordinary transaction of 
purchase brings into contact two minds actuate/! by diametrically 
opposed interests. The purchaser, who is not asking for a soap 
he has used before, has some hazy suspicion that the shopkeeper 
will try to sell, not the article best worth the price, but the article 
which leaves the largest margin of profit; and the purchaser 
imagines that he in some measure secures himself against a bad 
bargain when he exercises his authority by asking for some 
specific brand or make of the commodity he seeks. If hehasseen 
any one soap so persistently advertised that his memory retains 
its name, he will ask for it, not because he has any reason to 
believe it to be better or cheaper than others, but simply because 
he baffles the shopkeeper, and assumes an authoritative attitude 
by exerting his own freedom of choice. This curious and obscure 
principle of action probably lies at the root of all poster advertis- 
ing, for the poster does not set forth an argument as does the 
newspaper advertisement. It hardly attempts to reason with 
the reader, but merely impresses a name upon his memory. It 
is possible, by lavish advertising, to go so far in this direction 
that the trade-mark of a certain manufacturer becomes synony- 
mous with the name of a commodity, so that when the consumer 
thinks of soap or asks for soap, his concept inevitably couples 
the maker's name with the word " soap " itself. In order that 
the poster may leave any impression upon his mind, it must of 
course first attract his attention. The assistance which the 
advertiser receives from the artist in this connexion is discussed 
in the article Poster. 

The fact that the verb " to circularize " was first used in 1848, 
sufficiently indicates the very recent origin of the practice of 
plying possible purchasers with printed letters and 
pamphlets. The penny postage was not established m ™ t 6 * e " 
in England until 1840; the halfpenny post for circulars circular. 
was not introduced until 1855. In the United States 
a uniform rate of postage at two cents was not established until 
1883. In both countries cheap postage and cheap printing have 
so greatly encouraged the use of circulars that the sort of people 
whom the advertiser desires to reach — those who have the most 
money to spend, and whose addresses, published in directories, 
indicate their prosperous condition — are overwhelmed by trades- 
men's price-lists, appeals from charitable institutions, and other 
suggestions for the spending of money. The addressing of en- 
velopes and enclosing of circulars is now a recognized industry 
in many large towns both in Great Britain and in the United 
States. It seems, however, to be the opinion of expert advertisers 
that what is called " general circularizing " is unprofitable, and 
that circulars should only be sent to persons who have peculiar 
reason to be interested by their specific subject-matter. It may 
be noted, as an instance of the assiduity with which specialized 
circularizing is pursued, that the announcement of a birth, 
marriage or death in the newspapers serves to call forth a 
grotesque variety of circulars supposed to be adapted to the 
momentary needs of the recipient. 

In concluding this review of methods of advertising, other 
than advertisements in periodical publications, we may add , 
that the most extraordinary attempt at advertisement which 
is known to exist is to be found at the churchyard at Godalming, 
Surrey, where the following epitaph was placed upon a tomb- 
stone: — 



ADVERTISEMENT 



239 



Sacred 

To the memory of 

Nathaniel Godbold Esq. 

Inventor & Proprietor 

of that excellent medicine 

The Vegetable Balsam 

For the Cure of Consumptions & Asthmas. 

He departed this Life 

The 17th. day of Deer. 1799 

Aged 69 years. 

Hie Cineres, ubique Fama. 

The preparation of advertisements for the periodical press 
has within the last twenty years or so become so important a 
Adver- tas ' 1 t ' la *- a S reat number of writers and artists — many 
Using in of the latter possessing considerable abilities — gain a 
periodical livelihood from this pursuit. The ingenuity displayed 
pubiica- j n moc j ern newspaper advertising is unquestionably 
due to American initiative. The English newspaper 
advertisement of twenty years ago consisted for the most 
part of the mere reiteration of a name. An advertiser who 
took a column's space supplied enough matter to fill an inch, 
and ingenuously repeated his statement throughout the column. 
Such departures from this childlike method as were made were for 
the most part eccentric to the point of incoherence. It may, how- 
ever, be said in defence of English advertisers, that newspaper 
publishers for a long time sternly discountenanced any attempt 
to render advertisements attractive. So long as an advertiser 
was rigidly confined to the ordinary single-column measure, and 
so long as he was forbidden to use anything but the smallest 
sort of type, there was very little opportunity for him to attract 
the reader's attention. The newspaper publisher must always 
remember that the public buy a newspaper for the sake of the 
news, not for the sake of the advertisements, and that if the ad- 
vertisements are relegated to a position and a scope, in respect 
of display, so inferior that they may be overlooked, the adver- 
tiser cannot afford to bear his share of the cost of publication. 
Of late The Times, followed by almost all newspapers in the 
United Kingdom, has given the advertiser as great a degree of 
liberty as he really needs, and many experienced advertisers in 
America incline to the belief that the larger licence accorded to 
American advertisers defeats its own ends. The truth, would 
seem to be that the advertiser will always demand, and may 
fairly expect, the right to make his space as fantastic in appear- 
ance as that allotted to the editor. When some American editors 
see fit to print a headline in letters as large as a man's hand, and 
to begin half-a-dozen different articles on the first page of a 
newspaper, continuing one on page 2, another on page 4, and 
another on page 6, to the bewilderment of the reader, it can 
hardly be expected that the American advertiser should submit 
to any very strict code of decorum. The subject of the relation 
between a newspaper proprietor and his advertisers cannot be 
dismissed without reference to the notable independence of 
advertisers' influence, which English and American newspaper 
proprietors authorize their editors to display. Whenever an in- 
surance company or a bank goes wrong, the cry is raised that all 
the editors in Christendom had known for years that the directors 
were imbeciles and rogues, but had conspired to keep mute for 
the sake of an occasional advertisement. When the British 
public persisted, not long ago, in paying premium prices for the 
shares of over-capitalized companies, the crash had no sooner 
come than the newspapers were accused of having puffed pro- 
motions for the sake of the money received for publishing pros- 
pectuses. As a matter of fact, in the case of the best dailies in 
England and America, the editor does not stand at all in awe of 
the advertiser, and time after time the Money Article has ruth- 
lessly attacked a promotion of which the prospectus appeared 
in the very same issue. It is indeed to the interest of the ad- 
vertiser, as well as to the interest of the reader, that this inde- 
pendence should be preserved, for the worth of any journal as 
an advertising medium depends upon its possessing a bona fide 
circulation among persons who believe it to be a serious and 
honestly conducted newspaper. All advertisers know that the 
minor weeklies, which contain nothing but trade puffs, and are 
scattered broadcast among people who pay nothing for their 



copies, are absolutely worthless from the advertiser's point of 
view. The most striking difference between the periodical press 
of Great Britain and that of America is, that in the former country 
the magazines and reviews play but a secondary role, while in the 
United States the three or four monthlies possessing .the largest 
circulation are of the very first importance as advertising 
mediums. One reason for this is that the advertisements in an 
American magazine are printed on as good paper, and printed 
with as great care, as any other part of the contents. There are 
probably very few among American magazine readers who do 
not habitually look through the advertising pages, with the cer- 
tainty that they will be entertained by the beauty of the adver- 
tiser's illustrations and the quaint curtness of his phrases. 
Another reason is that the American monthly magazine goes to 
all parts of the United States, while, owing to the time required 
for long journeys on even the swiftest trains, no American daily 
paper can have so general a circulation as The Times in the United 
Kingdom. In comparison with points on the Pacific coast, 
Chicago does not seem far from New York, yet, with the excep- 
tion of one frenzied and altogether unsuccessful attempt, no 
New York daily has ever attempted to force a circulation in 
Chicago. The American advertiser would, therefore, have to 
spend money on a great number of daily papers in order to 
reach as widespread a public as one successful magazine offers 
him. 

There is reason to believe that the English magazine publishers 
have erred gravely in taking what are known in the trade as 
" insets," consisting of separate cards or sheets printed at the 
advertiser's cost, and accepted by the publisher at a specific 
charge for every thousand copies. This system of insetting has 
the grave inconvenience that the advertiser finds himself com- 
pelled to print as many insets as the publisher asserts that he 
can use. The publisher, on the other hand, is somewhat at the 
mercy of too enthusiastic agents and employ6s, who estimate 
over-confidently the edition of the periodical which will probably 
be printed for a certain month, and advertisers have had reason 
to fear that many of their insets were wasted. The added weight 
and bulk of the insets cause inconvenience and expense to the 
newsdealer, as two or three insets printed upon cardboard are 
equivalent to at least sixteen additional pages. Some news- 
dealers have further complicated the inset question by threaten- 
ing to remove insets unless special tribute be paid to them; 
and with all these difficulties to be considered, many magazine 
publishers have seriously considered the advisability of alto- 
gether discontinuing the practice of taking insets, and of confin- 
ing their advertisements to the sheets they themselves print. 
In connexion with this subject, it may be added that many 
readers habitually shake loose bills out of a magazine before they 
begin to turn the pages, and that railway stations, railway 
carriages and even public streets are thus littered with trampled 
and muddy advertisements. The old practice of distributing 
handbills in the streets is dying a natural death, more or less 
hastened by local by-laws, and when the loose bills in magazines 
and cheap novels have ceased to exist no one will be the loser. 

Advertisements in the weekly press are on the whole more 
successful in England than in America. A few American 
weeklies cope successfully with the increasing competition of 
the huge Sunday editions of American daily papers. But even 
the most successful among them — a paper for boys— has hardly 
attained the prosperity of some among its English contemporaries 
in the field of weekly journalism. 

The merchant who turns to these pages for practical sugges- 
tions concerning the advertising of his own business, can be given 
no better advice than to betake himself to an established adver- 
tising agent of good repute, and be guided by his counsels. The 
chief part that he can himself play with advantage is to note 
from day to day whether the agent is obtaining advantageous 
positions for his announcements. Every advertiser will naturally 
prefer a right-hand page to a left-hand page, and the right side 
of the page to the left side of the page; while the advertiser 
who most indefatigably urges his claims upon the agent will, 
in the long run, obtain the largest share of the favours to be 



240 



ADVERTISEMENT 



distributed. To the merchant who inclines to consider adver- 
tising in connexion with the broader aspects of his calling, it 
may be suggested that a new channel of trade demands very 
serious attention. What is called in England " postal trade," 
and in America " mail order business," is growing very rapidly. 
Small dealers in both countries have complained very bitterly 
of the competition they suffer from the general dealers and 
from stores made up of departments which, under one roof, 
offer to the consumer every imaginable sort of merchandise. 
This general trading, which, on the one hand, seriously threatens 
the small trader, and on the other hand offers greater possibilities 
of profit to the proportionately small number of persons who 
can undertake business on so large a scale, becomes infinitely 
more formidable when the general dealer endeavours not only 
to attract the trade of a town, but to make his place of business 
a centre from which he distributes by post his goods to remote 
parts of the country. In America, where the weight of parcels 
carried by post is limited to 4 lb, and where the private 
carrying companies are forced to charge a very much higher 
rate for carriage from New York to California than for shorter 
distances, the centralization of trade is necessarily limited; but 
it is no secret that, at the present moment, persons residing in 
those parts of the United Kingdom most remote from London 
habitually avail themselves of the English parcel post, which 
carries packages up to n lb, in order to procure a great 
part of their household supplies direct from general dealers in 
London. A trading company, which conducts its operations 
upon such a scale as this, can afford to spend an almost un- 
limited sum in advertising throughout the United Kingdom, 
and even the trader who offers only one specific class of merchan- 
dise is beginning to recognize the possibility of appealing to the 
whole country. 

The following is a brief summary of the laws and regulations 

dealing with advertisements in public places in certain 

regulation. °^ tne countries of Continental Europe and in the 

United States of America, the chief authority for 

which is an official return issued by the British Home Office 

in 1903. 

France. — The permission of the owner is alone required for 
the placing of advertisements on private buildings; but build- 
ings, walls, &c, belonging to the government or local authorities 
are reserved exclusively for official notices, &c. ; these alone 
can be printed on white paper, all others must be on coloured 
paper. Municipal authorities control the size, construction, &c, 
of hoardings used for advertising purposes, and the police have 
full powers over the exhibition of indecent or other objectionable 
advertisements. The Somite pour la protection des paysages, 
founded in 1001, has for one of its objects the prevention of 
advertisements which disfigure the scenery or are otherwise 
objectionable. 

Germany. — By §43 of the Imperial Commercial Ordinance 
permission to post any trade advertisement in a public street, 
square, &c, must be first obtained from the local police. The 
police also control (by §55 of the Imperial Press Law 1874) 
advertisements which are not of a trade character, but this 
regulation does not affect the right of the federal legislatures 
to make regulations in regard to them (§30). It would be 
impossible to give in any detail the police regulations as to 
advertisements which exist, e.g. in Prussia, but the following 
rules in force in Berlin may be given:— Public advertisements in 
public streets and places may be posted only on the appliances, 
such as pillar posts, &c, provided for the purpose. Owners of 
property may post advertisements on their own property but 
only such as concern their own interests. Advertisements on 
public conveyances are forbidden. In 1902 a Prussian law was 
passed authorizing the police to forbid all advertisement hoard- 
ings, &c, which would disfigure particularly beautiful landscapes 
in rural districts. The Hesse-Darmstadt Act of 1902 prohibits 
the placing of any advertisements, posters, &c, on a monument 
officially protected under the act, if it would be likely to injure 
the appearance of the monument. As instances of the numerous 
local provisions against the abuse of advertising may be cited 



those of Augsburg and Liibeck, by which any advertisement that 
would injure the Stadtbild or appearance of the town may be 
prohibited and removed by the local authority (see G. Baldwin 
Brown, The Care of Ancient Monuments, 1905). Full powers 
exist under the Imperial Criminal Code for the suppression of 
indecent or objectionable advertisements. 

Austria. — Permission of the police is required for the exhibi- 
tion of printed notices in public places other than such as are of 
purely local or industrial interest, such as notices of entertain- 
ment, leases, sales, &c, or theatre programmes, and these can 
only be shown in places approved by the local authorities (Press 
Law 1862). The press-police act as advertisement censors and 
determine whether an advertisement can be allowed or not. 
In Hungary there are no general laws or regulations, but the 
municipalities have power to issue ordinances dealing with the 
question. 

Italy. — All control rests with the municipal and communal 
authorities, who may decide on the places where advertisements 
may or may not be posted, and can prevent hoardings being 
placed on or near ancient monuments or public buildings. 

Switzerland.— The Federal Government has no authority to 
deal with this question; certain of the cantons have regulations, 
e.g. Lucerne prohibits the public advertising of inferior goods 
by means of a false description, Basel-Stadt gives the police the 
power of censoring all advertisements. Many of the communal 
authorities throughout Switzerland have special restrictions 
and regulations. In Zurich the police choose the advertising 
stations, in Berne the municipality possesses a monopoly of the 
right of erecting advertisements. The Society known as the 
Ligue pour la conservation de la Suisse pittoresque or Schweitzeri- 
scher Heitnatschutz has for one of its objects the preservation of 
scenery from disfiguring advertisements. 

United States.— There is no federal legislation on the subject, 
the matter being one for regulation by the states, which in most 
cases have left it to the various municipalities and other local 
authorities. With regard to indecent and objectionable advert- 
isements some states have special legislation on the matter, 
others are content with the ordinary criminal laws or police 
powers or with the law of nuisance or of trespass. Thus control 
can be exercised over such advertisements as are dangerous to 
public safety, health or morals. The state of New York prohibits 
advertisements of lotteries. It would be impossible to give in 
detail the different laws and regulations passed in the various 
states or by municipalities. The following are some of the more 
striking measures adopted in certain of the states. In Massa- 
chusetts no advertising signs or devices are allowed on the public 
highways. Power has been granted to city and town authorities 
to regulate advertisements in, near or visible from public parks. 
In the District of Columbia no advertisement is allowed which 
obstructs a highway, and all distribution of handbills, circulars, 
&c, in public streets, parks, &c, is prohibited. This prohibition 
against what are generally known as " dodgers " is very general 
in the local regulations throughout the states. In Illinois, city 
councils are empowered on the incorporation of the city to regu- 
late and prevent the use of streets, sidewalks and public grounds 
for signs, handbills and advertisements, &c, and also the exhibi- 
tion of banners, placards, in the streets or sidewalks. Chicago 
has a body of most stringent rules, but they apparently have 
been found impossible to enforce; thus no advertisement board 
more than 12 ft. square within 400 ft. of a public park or 
boulevard, no advertisements other than small ones relating to 
the business carried on in the premises where the advertisement 
is posted, or of sales, &c, are allowed in streets where three- 
quarters of the houses are " residences "only. Prohibition is 
also extended to the advertisements of those professing to cure 
diseases or giving notice of the sale of medicines. In Boston 
there are regulations prohibiting projecting or overhanging 
signs in the streets, and special rules as to the height at which 
street signs and advertisements must be placed. The distribu- 
tion of " dodgers " in the streets is prohibited. Advertisements 
for places of amusement must be approved by the committee qi> 
licences. 



ADVICE^ADVOCATE 



241 



France, Belgium, Italy and certain of the cantons in Switzer- 
land impose a tax on advertisements, as do certain of the United 
Taxation States of America, where the form is usually that of a 
licence duty on billposters or advertising agencies. 
In many cases in the United States this is imposed by the muni- 
cipalities. In every case both in Europe and America advertise- 
ments in newspapers are not subject to any tax. 

With regard to the literature of advertising, in addition to the his- 
torical article in the Edinburgh Review for February 1843, already 
mentioned, and that in the Quarterly Review for June 1855, the 
Society for Checking the Abuses of Public Advertising issue a jour- 
nal, A Beautiful World. The Journal of the Society of Comparative 
Legislation (N.S. xvi. 1906) contains an article by W.J.B. Byles on 
Foreign Law and the Control of Advertisements in Public Places. 
The advertisers' handbooks, issued by the leading advertising 
agents, will also be found to contain practical information of 
great use to the advertiser. (H. R. H.*; C. We.) 

ADVICE (Fr. avis, from Lat. ad, to, and visum, viewed), 
counsel given after consideration, or information from a distance 
giving particulars of something prospective ( e.g. " advice " of 
an imminent battle, or of a cargo due). In commerce it is a 
common word for a formal notice from one person concerned in 
a transaction to another. 

ADVOCATE (Lat. advocatus, from advocare, to summon, 
especially in law to call in the aid of a counsel or witness, and so 
generally to summon to one's assistance), a lawyer authorized to 
plead the causes of litigants in courts of law. The word is used 
technically in Scotland (see Advocates, Faculty of) in a sense 
virtually equivalent to the English term barrister, and a deriva- 
tive from the same Latin source is so used in most of the countries 
of Europe where the civil law is in force. The word advocatus is 
not often used among the earlier jurists, and appears not to 
have had a strict meaning. It is not always associated with 
legal proceedings, and might apparently be applied to a supporter 
or coadjutor in the pursuit of any desired object. When it came 
to be applied with a more specific limitation to legal services, 
the position of the advocatus was still uncertain. It was different 
from, and evidently inferior to, that of the juris-consultus, who 
gave his opinion and advice in questions of law, and may be 
identified with the consulting counsel of the present day. Nor 
is the merely professional advocate to be confounded with the 
more distinguished orator, or palronus, who came forward in 
the guise of the disinterested vindicator of justice. This dis- 
tinction, however, appears to have arisen in later times, when the 
profession became mercenary. By the lex Cincia, passed about 
two centuries B.C., and subsequently renewed, the acceptance 
of remuneration for professional assistance in lawsuits was pro- 
hibited. This law, like all others of the kind, was evaded. The 
skilful debater was propitiated with a present; and though he 
could not sue for the value of his services, it was ruled that any 
honorarium so given could not be demanded back, even though 
he died before the anticipated service was performed. The traces 
of this evasion of a law may be found in the existing practice of 
rewarding counsel by fees in anticipation of services. 

The term advocatus came eventually to be the word employed 
when the bar had become a profession, and the qualifications, 
admission, numbers and fees of counsel had become a matter 
of state regulation, to designate the pleaders as a class of pro- 
fessional men, each individual advocate, however, being still 
spoken of as patron in reference to the litigant with whose interest 
he was entrusted. The advocatus fisci, or fiscal advocate, was 
an officer whose function, like that of a solicitor of taxes at the 
present day, was connected with the collection of the revenue. 

The lawyers who practised in the English courts of common 
law were never officially known as advocates, the word being 
reserved for those who practised in the courts of the civil and 
canon law (see Doctors' Commons). There was formerly an 
important official termed his majesty's advocate-general, or more 
shortly, the king's advocate, who was the principal law officer 
of the crown in the College of Advocates or Doctors' Commons, 
and in the admiralty and ecclesiastical courts. He discharged 
for these courts the duties which correspond to those of the 



solicitor of the treasury (see Solicitor). His opinion was taken 
by the foreign office on international matters, and on high 
ecclesiastical matters he was also consulted; all orders in council 
were submitted to him for approval. The office may now be 
said to be obsolete, for after the resignation of Sir Travers Twiss, 
the last holder, in 1872, it was not filled up. There was also a 
second law officer of the crown in the admiralty court called the 
admiralty advocate. This office has long been vacant. Advo- 
cate is also the title still in use in some of the British colonies 
to denote the chief law officer of the crown there. For instance, 
in Sierra Leone (until 1896), Lagos and Cyprus he is called the 
king's advocate; in Malta, crown advocate; in Mauritius, 
procureur and advocate-general, and in the provinces of India 
advocate-general. In France, the avocats, as a body, were re- 
organized under the empire by a decree of the 15th of December 
1810. There is, however, a distinction between avocats and 
avou&s. The latter, whose number is limited, act as procurators 
or agents, representing the parties before the tribunals, draft 
and prepare for them all formal acts and writings, and prepare 
their lawsuits for the oral debates. The office of the avocat, on 
the other hand, consists in giving advice as to the law, and con- 
ducting the causes of his clients by written and oral pleadings. 
The number of avocats is not limited; every licentiate of law 
being entitled to apply to the corporation of avocats attached 
to each court, and aftef presentation to the court, taking the oath 
of office and passing three years in attendance on some older 
advocate, to have himself recognised as an advocate. 

In Germany the advocat no longer forms a distinct class of 
lawyer. Since 1870, when a sweeping judicature act (Deutsche 
Justizgesetzgebung) reconstituted the judicial system, the advo- 
cat in his character of adviser, as distinguished from the pro- 
curator, who formerly represented the client in the courts, has 
become merged in the Rechtsanwalt, who has the dual character 
of counsellor and pleader. 

In the middle ages the word' advocatus (Fr. avoue, Ger. Vogt) 
was used on the continent as the title of the lay lord charged 
with the protection and representation in secular 
matters of an abbey. The office is traceable as early ^ ocatus 
as the beginning of the 5th century in the Roman ecciesiae. 
empire, the churches being allowed to choose defen- 
sors from the body of advocates to represent them in the courts. 
In the Frankish kingdom, under the Merovingians, these lay 
representatives of the churches appear as agentes, defensores 
and advocati; and under the Carolingians it was made obli- 
gatory on bishops, abbots and abbesses to appoint such officials 
in every county where they held property. The office was not 
hereditary, the advocatus being chosen, either by the abbot alone, 
or by the abbot and bishop concurrently with the count. The 
same causes that led to the development of the feudal system 
also affected the advocatus. In times of confusion churches and 
abbeys needed not so much a legal representative as an armed 
protector, while as feudal immunities were conceded to the 
ecclesiastical foundations, these required a representative to 
defend their rights and to fulfil their secular obligations to the 
state, e.g. to lead the ecclesiastical levies to war. A new class 
of advocatus thus arose, whose office, commonly rewarded by a 
grant of land, crystallized into a fief, which, like other fiefs, had 
by the beginning of the nth century become hereditary. 

In France the advocati (avoues) were of two classes — (1) great 
barons, who held the advocateship of an abbey or abbeys rather 
as an office than a fief, though they were indemnified 
for the protection they afforded by a domain and Fn„ch 
revenues granted by the abbey: thus the duke of avoue. 
Normandy was advocatus of nearly all the abbeys in 
the duchy; (2) petty seigneurs, who held their avoueries as heredi- 
tary fiefs and often as their sole means of subsistence. The avoui 
of an abbey, of this class, corresponded to the vidame (q.v.) of a 
bishop. Their function was generally to represent the abbot in 
his capacity as feudal lord; to act as his representative in the 
courts of his superior lord; to exercise secular justice in the 
abbot's name in the abbatial court; to lead the retainers of the 
abbey to battle under the banner of the patron saint. 



242 



ADVOCATES, FACULTY OfV-ADVOWSON 



In England the word advocatus was never ; used to denote an 
hereditary representative of an abbot; but in some of the larger 
abbeys there were hereditary stewards whose functions 
England. an( ^ privileges were not dissimilar to those of the 
continental advocati. The word advocatus, however, 
was in constant use in England to denote the patron of an 
ecclesiastical benefice, whose sole right of any importance was 
an hereditary one of presenting a parson to the bishop for in- 
stitution. In this way the hereditary right of presentation to a 
benefice came to be called in English an " advowson " (advocatio). 

The advocatus played a more important part in the feudal 
polity of the Empire and of the Low Countries than in France, 
where his functions, confined to the protection of the interests 
of religious houses, were superseded from the 13th century on- 
wards by the growth of the central power and the increasing 
efficiency of the royal administration. They had, indeed, long 
ceased to be effective for their original purpose; and from the 
time when their office became a fief they had taken advantage of 
their position to pillage and suppress those whom- it was their 
function to defend. The medieval records, not in France only, 
are full of complaints by abbots of their usurpations, .exactions 
and acts of violence. 

In Germany the title of advocatus ( Vogt) was given not only 
to the advypati of churches and abbeys, but to the officials 
appointed, from early in the middle ages, by the 
German emperor to administer their immediate domains, in 
Vogt. contradistinction to the counts, who had become 

hereditary princes of the Empire. The territory so 
administered was known as Vogtland {terra advocatorum) , a 
name still sometimes employed to designate the strip of 
country which embraces the principalities of Reuss and adjacent 
portions of Saxony, Prussia and Bavaria. These imperial 
advocati tended in their turn to become hereditary. Sometimes 
the emperor himself assumed the title of Vogt of some particular 
part of his immediate domain. In the Netherlands as well as 
in Germany advocati were often appointed in the cities, by the 
overlord or by the emperor, sometimes to take the place of the 
bailiff (Ger. Schultheiss, Dutch schout, Lat. scultetus), some- 
times alongside this official. 

See Du Cange, Glossariuni (ed. 1,883, Niort), s. " Advocati "; A. 
Luchaire, Manuel des institutions frangaises (Paris, 1892) ; Herzog- 
Hauck, Realencyklopadie (ed. Leipzig, 1896), s. " Advocatus ec- 
clesiae," where further references will be found. 

ADVOCATES, FACULTY OF, the collective term by which 
what in England are called barristers are known in Scotland. 
They professionally attend the supreme courts in Edinburgh; 
but they are privileged to plead in any cause before the inferior 
courts, where counsel are not excluded by statute. They may 
act in cases of appeal before the House of Lords; and in some 
of the British colonies, where the civil law is in force, it is cus- 
tomary for those who practise as barristers to pass as advocates 
in Scotland. This body has existed by immemorial custom. 
Its privileges are constitutional, and are founded on no statute 
or charter of incorporation. The body formed itself gradually, 
from time to time, on the model of the French corporations of 
avocats, appointing like them by a general vote, a dean or doyen, 
who is their principal officer. It also differs from the English 
and Irish societies in that there is no governing body similar to 
the benchers, nor is there any resemblance to the quasi-collegiate 
discipline and the usages and customs prevailing in an inn of 
court. No curriculum of study, residence or professional train- 
ing was, until 1856, required on entering this profession; but 
the faculty have always had the power, believed to-be liable to 
control by the Court of Session, of rejecting any candidate for 
admission. The candidate undergoes two private examinations 
— the one in general scholarship, in lieu of which, however, he 
may produce evidence of his having graduated as master of arts 
in a Scottish university, or obtained an equivalent degree in an 
English or foreign university; and the other, at the interval of 
a year, in Roman, private international and Scots law. He must, 
before the latter examination, produce evidence of attendance at 
classes of Scots law and conveyancing in a Scottish university, 



and at classes of, civil law, public or international law, consti- 
tutional law and medical jurisprudence in a Scottish or other 
approved university. He has then to undergo the old academic 
form of the public impugnment of a thesis on some title of the 
pandects; but this ceremony, called the public examination, has : 
degenerated into a mere form. A large proportion of the candi- 
date's entrance fees (amounting to £339) is devoted to the 
magnificent library belonging to the faculty, which literary 
investigators in Edinburgh find so eminently useful. 

ADVOCATUS DIABOLI, devil's. advocate, the name popularly 
given to the promoter of the Faith (promoter fidei) , and officer of 
the Sacred Congregation of Rites at Rome, whose duty is to 
prepare all possible arguments against the admission of any one 
to the posthumous honours of beatification and canonization. 
This functionary is first formally mentioned under Leo X.(i5i3~ 
1521) in the proceedings in connexion with the canonization of St 
Lorenzo Giustiniani. In 1631 Urban VIII. made his presence,, 
either in person or by deputy, necessary for the validity of any 
act connected with the process of beatification or canonization 
(see Canonization). The phrase, " devil's advocate," has by an 
easy transference come to be used of any one who puts himself 
up, or is put up, for the sake of promoting debate, to argue a 
case in which he does not necessarily believe. 

ADVOWSON, or Advowzen (through O. Fr. advouson, from 
Lat. advocatio, a summons to), the right of presentation to 
a vacant ecclesiastical benefice, so called because the patron 
defends or advocates the claims of the person whom he presents. 
At what period the right of advowson arose is uncertain; it 
was probably the result of gradual growth. The earliest trace 
of the practice is found in the decree of the council of Orangej 
a.d. 441, which allowed a bishop, who had built a church in the, 
diocese of another bishop, to nominate the clerk, but not to 
consecrate the church. The 123rd Novel of Justinian, promul- 
gated about the end of the 5th century, decreed " that if any 
man should erect an oratory, and desire to present a clerk thereto 
by himself or his heirs, if they furnish a competency for his live- 
lihood, and nominate to the bishop such as are worthy, they may 
be ordained." The 57th Novel empowered the bishop to examine 
them and judge of their qualifications, and, where those were 
sufficient, obliged him to admit the clerk. In England, for quite 
two centuries after its conversion, the clergy administered only 
pro tempore in the parochial churches, receiving their maintenance 
from the cathedral church, all the appointments within the dio- 
cese lying with the bishop. But in order to promote the building 
and endowment of parochial churches those who had contributed 
to their erection either by a grant of land, by building or by 
endowment, became entitled to present a clerk of their own 
choice to the bishop, who was invested with the revenues derived 
from such contribution. After the Norman Conquest, when the 
boundaries between church and state were more clearly marked, 
it became usual for patrons to appoint to livings not only without 
the consent, but even against the will, of the bishops. 

Advowsons are divided into two kinds, appendant and in gross. 
Originally the right of nominating 1 or presenting was annexed 
to the person who built or endowed the church, but the right 
gradually became annexed to the manor in which it was built, 
for the endowment was considered parcel of the manor, the 
church being built for the use'of the inhabitants, and the tithes 
of the manor being attached to the church. Consequently 
where the right of patronage (the right of the patron to present 
to the bishop the person whom he has nominated to become 
rector or vicar of the parish to the benefice of which he claims 
the right of advowson) remains attached to the manor, it is called 
an advowson appendant, and passes with the estate by inheritance 

1 The distinction between nomination to a living and presentation 
is to be noted. Nomination is the power, by virtue of a manor or 
otherwise, to appoint a clerk to the patron of a benefice, to be byi 
him presented to the ordinary. Presentation is the act of a patron, 
in offering his clerk to the bishop, to be instituted in a benefice of 
his gift. Nomination and presentation, though generally used in 
law for the same thing, must be so distinguished, for it is possible 
that the rights of nomination may be in one person, and the rights 
of presentation in another. 



ADYE 



243 



or sale without any special conveyance. But where, as is often 
the case, the right of presentation has been sold by itself, and 
so separated from the manor, it is called an advowson in gross. 
An advowson may also be partly appendant, and partly in gross, 
e.g. if an owner granted to another every second presentment, 
the advowson would be appendant for the grantor's turn and 
in gross for the grantee's. 

Advowsons are further distinguished into presentative and 
collative. In a presentative advowson, the patron presents a 
clergyman to the bishop, with the petition that he be instituted 
into the vacant living. The bishop is bound to induct if he find 
the clergyman canonically qualified, and a refusal on his part 
is subject to an appeal to an ecclesiastical court either by patron 
or by presentee. In a collative advowson the bishop is himself 
the patron, either in his own right or in the right of the proper 
patron, which has lapsed to him through not being exercised 
within the statutory period of six months after the vacancy 
occurred. No petition is necessary in this case, and the bishop 
is said to collate to the benefice. Before 1898 there were also 
donative advowsons, but the Benefices Act 1898 made all dona- 
tions with cure of souls presentative. In a donative advowson, 
the sovereign, or any subject by special licence from the sover- 
eign, conferred a benefice by a simple letter of gift, without 
any reference to the bishop, and without presentation and in- 
stitution. The, .incumbent of such a living was to a great extent 
free from the jurisdiction of the bishop, who could only reach 
him through the action of an ecclesiastical court. 

The Benefices Act of 1898 did not make any substantial 
change in the legal character of advowsons, which remain 
practically the same as before the act. Briefly, it prevents the 
dealing with the right of presentation as a thing apart from the 
advowson itself; increases the power of the bishops to refuse 
the presentation of unfit persons, and removes several abuses 
which had arisen in the transfer of patronage. Under the pre- 
viously existing law, simony, or " the corrupt presentation of 
any person to an ecclesiastical benefice for gift, money or 
reward," renders the presentation void, and subjects the persons 
privy or party to it to penalties; a presentation to a vacant 
benefice cannot be sold, and no clerk in holy orders can purchase 
for himself a next presentation. An advowson may, however, 
be sold during a vacancy, though that will not give the right 
to present to that vacancy; and a clerk may buy an advowson 
even though it be only an estate for life, and present himself on 
the next vacancy. Under the Benefices Act, advowsons may 
not be sold by public auction except in conjunction with landed 
property adjacent to the benefice; transfers of patronage must 
be registered in the registry of the diocese, and no such transfers 
can be made within twelve months after the last admission or 
institution to the benefice. Restrictions had also been imposed 
on the transfer of patronage of churches built under the Church 
Building Acts and New Parishes Acts, and on that of benefices 
in the gift of the lord chancellor, and sold by him in order to 
augment others; but agreements may be made as to the patron- 
age of such churches in favour of persons who have contri- 
buted to their building or enlargement without being void for 
simony. 

The right of presentation may be exercised by its owner 
whether he be an infant, executors, trustees, coparceners (who, 
if they cannot agree, present in turn in order of age) or mort- 
gagee (who must present the nominee of the mortgagor), or a 
bankrupt (who, although the advowson belongs to his creditors, 
yet has the right to present to a vacancy). Certain owners of 
advowsons are temporarily or permanently disabled from exer- 
cising the right which devolves upon other persons; and the 
crown as patron paramount of all benefices can fill all churches 
not regularly filled by other patrons. It thus presents to all 
vacancies caused by simoniacal presentations, or by the incum- 
bent having been presented to a bishopric or in benefices belong- 
ing to a bishopric when the see is vacant by the bishop's death, 
translation or deprivation. Where a presentation belongs to 
a lunatic, the lord chancellor presents for him. Where it belongs 
to a Roman Catholic the right is exercised in his behalf by the 



university of Oxford if the benefice be situate south of the river 
Trent, and by that of Cambridge if it be north of that river. 

Besides the qualifications required of a presentee by canon 
law, such as being of the canonical age, and in priest's orders 
before admission, sufficient learning and proper orthodoxy or 
morals, the Benefices Act requires that a year shall have elapsed 
since a transfer of the right of patronage, unless it can be shown 
that such transfer was not made in view of a probable vacancy; 
that the presentee has been a deacon for three years; and that 
he is not unfit for the discharge of his duties by reason of physical 
or mental infirmity or incapacity, grave pecuniary embarrass- 
ment, grave misconduct or neglect of duty in an ecclesiastical 
office, evil life, or conduct causing grave scandal concerning his 
moral character since his ordination, or being party to an illegal 
agreement with regard to the presentation; that notice of the 
presentation has been given to the parish of the benefice. Except 
by leave of the bishop or sequestrator, the incumbent of a seques- 
tered benefice cannot be presented. The act also gives to both 
patron and presentee an alternative mode of appeal against a 
bishop's refusal to institute or admit, except on a ground of 
doctrine or ritual, to a court composed of an archbishop of the 
province and a judge of the High Court nominated for that 
purpose by the lord chancellor, a course which, however, bars 
resort being had to the ordinary suits of duplex querela or action 
of quare impedit. In case of refusal of one presentee, a lay 
patron may present another, and a clerical patron may do so 
after an unsuccessful appeal against the refusal. 

Upon institution the church is full against everybody except 
the crown, and after six months' peaceable possession the clerk 
is secured in possession of the benefice, even though he may 
have been presented by a person who is not the proper patron. 
The true patron can, however, exercise his right to present at 
the next vacancy, and can reserve the advowson from an usurper 
at any time within three successive incumbencies so created 
adversely to his right, or within sixty years. Collation, which 
otherwise corresponds to institution, does not make the church 
full, and the true patron can dispossess the clerk at any time, 
unless he is a patron who collates. Possession of the benefice 
is completed by induction, which makes the church full against 
any one, including the crown. If the proper patron fails to exer- 
cise his right within six calendar months from the vacancy, the 
right devolves or lapses to the next superior patron, e.g. from an 
ordinary patron to the bishop, and if he makes similar default 
to the archbishop, and from him on similar default to the Crown. 
If a bishopric becomes vacant after a lapse has accrued to it, 
it goes to the metropolitan; but in case of a vacancy of a 
benefice during the vacancy of the see the crown presents. Until 
the right of presentation so accruing to a bishop or archbishop 
is exercised, the patron can still effectually present but not if 
lapse has gone to the crown. 

(See also Benefice; Glebe; Incumbent; Vicar.) 

Authorities. — Burn, Ecclesiastical Law; Bingham's Origines 
Ecclesiasticae, or, the Antiquities of the English Church; Mirehouse, 
On Advowson; Phillimore, Ecclesiastical Law. 

ADYE, SIR JOHN MILLER (1819-1900), British general, son 
of Major James P. Adye, was born at Sevenoaks, Kent, on the 
1st of November 1819. He entered the Royal Artillery in 1836, 
was promoted captain in 1846, and served throughout the 
Crimean War as brigade-major and assistant adjutant-general 
of artillery (C.B., brevets of major and lieutenant-colonel). In 
the Indian Mutiny he served on the staff in a similar capacity. 
Promoted brevet-colonel in i860, he was specially employed in 
1863 in the N.W. frontier of India campaign, and was deputy- 
adjutant-general, Bengal, from 1863 to 1866, when he returned 
home. From 1870 to 1875 Adye was director of artillery and 
stores at the War Office. He was made a K.C.B. in 1873, and 
was promoted to be major-general and appointed governor of 
the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, in 1875, and surveyor- 
general of the ordnance in 1880. In 1882 he was chief of staff 
and second in command of the expedition to Egypt, and served 
throughout the campaign (G.C.B. and thanks of parliament). He 
held the government of Gibraltar from 1883 to 1886. Promoted 



244 



ADYTUM— AEDUI 



lieutenant-general in 1879, general and colonel commandant of 
the Royal Artillery in 1884, he retired in 1886. He unsuccess- 
fully contested Bath in the Liberal interest in 1892. He died 
on the 26th of August 1900. He was author of A Review of 
The Crimean War; The Defence of Cawnpore; A Frontier Cam- 
paign in Afghanistan; Recollections of a Military Life; and 
Indian Frontier Policy. 

ADYTUM, the Latinized form of aSvrov (not to be entered), 
the innermost sanctuary in ancient temples, access to which was 
forbidden to all but the officiating priests. The most famous 
adytum in Greece was in the temple of Apollo at Delphi. 

ADZE (from the Old Eng. adesa, of which the origin is un- 
known), a tool used for cutting and planing. It is somewhat 
like an axe reversed, the edge of the blade curving inward and 
placed at right angles to the handle. This shape is most suitable 
for planing uneven timber, as inequalities are " hooked off " by 
the curved blade. (See Tools.) 

AEACUS, in Greek legend, ancestor of the Aeacidae, was the 
son of Zeus and Aegina, daughter of the river-god Asopus. His 
mother was carried off by Zeus to the island of Oenone, which 
was afterwards called by her name. The island having been 
depopulated by a pestilence, Zeus changed the ants upon it into 
human beings (Ovid, Met. vii. 520), who were called Myrmidones 
(juiipAiijxes =5.ants) . Aeacus ruled over his people with such justice 
and impartiality that after his death he was made judge of the 
lower world together with Minos and Rhadamanthus. By his 
wife Endeis he was the father of Telamon and Peleus. His 
successful prayer to Zeus for rain at a time of drought (Isocrates, 
Evagoras, 14) was commemorated by a temple at Aegina (Pau- 
sanias ii. 29). He himself erected a temple to Zeus Panhellenios 
and helped Poseidon and Apollo to build the walls of Troy. 

See Hutchinson, Aeacus, 1901. 

AECLANUM, an ancient town of Samnium, Italy, 15 m. E.S.E. 
of Beneventum, on the Via Appia (near the modern Mirabella). 
It became the chief town of the Hirpini after Beneventum had 
become a Roman colony. Sulla captured it in 89 B.C. by setting 
on fire the wooden breastwork by which it was defended, and 
new fortifications were erected. Hadrian, who repaired the Via 
Appia from Beneventum to this point, made it a colony; it has 
ruins* of the city walls, of an aqueduct, baths and an amphi- 
theatre; nearly 400 inscriptions have also been discovered. 
Two different routes to Apulia diverged at this point, one (Via 
Aurelia Aeclanensis) leading through the modern Ariano to 
Herdoniae, the other (the Via Appia of the Empire) passing the 
Lacus Ampsanctus and going on to Aquilonia and Venusia; 
while the road from Aeclanum to Abellinum (mod. Avellini) 
may also follow an ancient line. H. Nissen {Italische Landes- 
kunde, Berlin, 1902, ii. 819) speaks of another road, which he 
believes to have been that followed by Horace, from Aeclanum 
to Trevicum and thence to Ausculum; but Th. Mommsen 
(Corpus Inscrip. Lai., Berlin, 1883, ix. 602) is more likely to be 
right in supposing that the road taken by Horace ran directly 
from Beneventum to Trevicum and thence to Aquilonia (though 
the course of this road is not yet determined in detail), and that 
the easier, though somewhat longer, road by Aeclanum was of 
later date. 

AEDESIUS (d. a.d. 355), Neoplatonist philosopher, was born 
of a noble Cappadocian family. He migrated to Syria, attracted 
by the lectures of lamblichus, whose follower he became. Ac- 
cording to Eunapius, he differed from lamblichus on certain 
points connected with magic. He taught at Pergamum, his 
chief disciples being Eusebius and Maximus. He seems to have 
modified his doctrines through fear of Constantine. 

See'Ritter and Preller, 552; Ritter's Geschichte der Philosophic, 
T. Whittaker, The Neoplatonisls (Cambridge, 1901). 

AEDICULA (diminutive of Lat. aedis or aedes, a temple or 
house), a small house or terhple, — a household shrine holding 
small altars or the statues of the Lares and Penates. 

AEDILE (Lat. aedilis), in Roman antiquities, the name of 
certain Roman magistrates, probably derived from aedis (a 
temple), because they had the care of the temple of Ceres, where 
the plebeian archives were kept. They were originally two in 



number, called " plebeian " aediles. They were created in the 
same year as the tribunes of the people (494 B.C.), their persons 
were sacrosanct or inviolable, and (at least after 471) they were 
elected at the Comitia Tributa out of the plebeians alone. 
Originally intended as assistants to the tribunes, they exercised 
certain police functions, were empowered to inflict fines and 
managed the plebeian and Roman games. According to Livy 
(vi. 42), after the passing of the Licinian rogations, an extra day 
was added to the Roman games; the aediles refused to bear 
the additional expense, whereupon the patricians offered to 
undertake it, on condition that they were admitted to the aedile- 
ship. The plebeians accepted the offer, and accordingly two 
" curule " aediles were appointed — at first from the patricians 
alone, then from patricians and plebeians in turn, lastly, from 
either — at the Comitia Tributa under the presidency of the 
consul. Although not sacrosanct, they had the right of sitting 
in a curule chair and wore the distinctive toga praetexta. They 
took over the management of the Roman and Megalesian games, 
the care of the patrician temples and had the right of issuing 
edicts as superintendents of the markets. But although the 
curule aediles always ranked higher than the plebeian, their 
functions gradually approximated and became practically 
identical. 

Cicero (Legg. iii. 3, 7) divides these functions under three 
heads: — (1) Care of the city: the repair and preservation of 
temples, sewers and aqueducts; street cleansing and paving; 
regulations regarding traffic, dangerous animals and dilapidated 
buildings; precautions against fire; superintendence of baths 
and taverns; enforcement of sumptuary laws; punishment of 
gamblers and usurers; the care of public morals generally, 
including the prevention of foreign superstitions. They also 
punished those who had too large a share of the ager publicus, 
or kept too many cattle on the state pastures. (2) Care of provi- 
sions: investigation of the quality of the articles supplied and 
the correctness of weights and measures; the purchase of corn 
for disposal at a low price in case of necessity. (3) Care of the 
games: superintendence and organization of the public games, 
as well as of those given by themselves and private individuals 
(e.g. at funerals) at their own expense. Ambitious persons often 
spent enormous sums in this manner to win the popular favour 
with a. view to official advancement. 

In 44 Caesar added two patrician aediles, called Cereales, 
whose special duty was the care of the corn-supply. Under 
Augustus the office lost much of its importance, its juridical 
functions and the care of the games being transferred to the 
praetor, while its city responsibilities were limited by the *j- 
pointment of a praefectus urbi. In the 3rd century \. d. it 
disappeared altogether. 

Authorities. — Schubert, De Romanorum Aedilibus (1828) ; Hoff- 
mann, De Aedilibus Romanis (1,842) ; Goll, De Aedilibus sub Caesarum 
Imperio (i860) ; Labatut, Les Ediles et les mtzurs (1868) ; Marquardt 
Mommsen, Handbuch der romischen Altertiimer, ii. (1888); Soltau, 
Die urspriingliche Bedeutung und Competenz der Aediles Plebis (Bonn, 
1882). 

AEDUI, Haedui or Hedui (Gr. Mdovoi), a Gallic people of 
Gallia Lugdunensis, who inhabited the country between the 
Arar (Saone) and Liger (Loire). The statement in Strabo (ii. 3. 
192) that they dwelt between the Arar and Dubis (Doubs) is 
incorrect. Their territory thus included the greater part of 
the modern departments of Sa6ne-et-Loire, Cote d'Or and 
Nievre. According to Livy (v. 34) , they took part in the expedi- 
tion of Bellovesus into Italy in the 6th century B.C. Before 
Caesar's time they had attached themselves to the Romans, 
and were honoured with the title of brothers and kinsmen of 
the Roman people. When the Sequani, their neighbours on 
the other side of the Arar, with whom they were continually 
quarrelling, invaded their country and subjugated them with 
the assistance of a German chieftain named Ariovistus, the 
Aedui sent Divitiacus, the druid, to Rome to appeal to the 
senate for help, but his mission was unsuccessful. On his arrival 
in Gaul (58 B.C.), Caesar restored their independence. In spite 
of this, the Aedui joined the Gallic coalition against Caesar 
(B.G. vii. 42), but after the surrender of Vercingetorix at Alesia 



AEGADIAN ISLANDS— AEGEAN CIVILIZATION 



245 



were glad to return to their allegiance. Augustus dismantled 
their native capital Bibracte on Mont Beuvray, and substituted 
a new town with a half-Roman, half-Gaulish name, Augusto- 
dunum (mod. Autun). During the reign of Tiberius (a.d. 21), 
they revolted under Julius Sacrovir, and seized Augustodunum, 
but were soon put down by Gaius Silius (Tacitus, Ann. iii. 
43-46). The Aedui were the first of the Gauls to receive from 
the emperor Claudius the distinction of the jus honorum. The 
oration of Eumenius (g.v.), in which he pleaded for the restora- 
tion of the schools of his native place Augustodunum, shows 
that the district was neglected. The chief magistrate of the 
Aedui in Caesar's time was called Vergobrelus (according to 
Mommsen, "judgment-worker"), who was elected annually, 
possessed powers of life and death, but was forbidden to go 
beyond the frontier. Certain clientes, or small communities, 
were also dependent upon the Aedui. 

See A. E. Desjardins, Geographic de la Gaule, ii. (1 876-1 893) ; T. R. 
Holmes, Caesar's Conquest of Caul (1899). 

AEGADIAN ISLANDS (Ital. I sole Egati; anc. Aegates In- 
sulae), a group of small mountainous islands off the western 
coast of Sicily, chiefly remarkable as the scene of the defeat 
of the Carthaginian fleet by C. Lutatius Catulus in 241 B.C., 
which ended the First Punic War. Favignana (Aegusa), the 
largest, pop. (1901) 6414, lies 10 m. S.W. of Trapani; Levanzo 
(Phorbantia) 8 m. W.; while Maritimo, the ancient lepa vrjcros, 
15 m. W. of Trapani, is now reckoned as a part of the group. 
They belonged to the Pallavicini family of Genoa until 1874, 
when they were bought by Signor Florio of Palermo. 

AEGEAN CIVILIZATION, the general term for the prehistoric 
civilization, previously called "Mycenaean" because its existence 
was first brought to popular notice by Heinrich Schliemann's 
excavations at Mycenae in 1876. Subsequent discoveries, how- 
ever, have made it clear that Mycenae was not its chief centre 
in its earlier stages, or, perhaps, at any period; and, accordingly, 
it is more usual now to adopt a wider geographical title. 

I. History of Discovery and Distribution of Remains. — Mycenae 
and Tiryns are the two principal sites on which evidence of a 
prehistoric civilization was remarked long ago by the classical 
Greeks. The curtain- wall and towers of the Mycenaean .citadel, 
its gate with heraldic lions, and the great " Treasury of 
Atreus " had borne silent witness for ages before Schliemann's 
time; but they were supposed only to speak to the Homeric, or 
at farthest a rude Heroic beginning of purely Hellenic, civiliza- 
tion. It was not till Schliemann exposed the contents of the 
graves which lay just inside the gate (see Mycenae), that 
scholars recognized the advanced stage of art to which pre- 
historic dwellers in the Mycenaean citadel had attained. There 
had been, however, a good deal of other evidence available before 
1876, which, had it been collated and seriously studied, might 
have discounted the sensation that the discovery of the citadel 
graves eventually made. Although it was recognized that 
certain tributaries, represented e.g. in the XVIIIth Dynasty tomb 
of Rekhmara at Egyptian Thebes as bearing vases of peculiar 
forms, were of some Mediterranean race, neither their precise 
habitat nor the degree of their civilization could be determined 
while so few actual prehistoric remains were known in the 
Mediterranean lands. Nor did the Aegean objects which were 
lying obscurely in museums in 1870, or thereabouts, provide a 
sufficient test of the real basis underlying the Hellenic myths 
of the Argolid, the Troad and Crete, to cause these to be taken 
seriously. Both at Sevres and Neuchatel Aegean vases have 
been exhibited since about 1840, the provenience being in the 
one case Phylakope in Melos, in the other Cephalonia. Ludwig 
Ross, by his explorations in the Greek islands from 1835 onwards, 
called attention to certain early intaglios, since known as 
Inselsteine; but it was not till 1878 that C. T. Newton demon- 
strated these to be no strayed Phoenician products. In 1866 
primitive structures were discovered in the island of Therasia 
by quarrymen extracting pozzolana for the Suez Canal works; 
and when this discovery was followed up in 1870, on the neigh- 
bouring Santorin (Thera), by representatives of the French 
School at Athens, much pottery of a class now known immedi- 



ately to precede the typical late Aegean ware, and many stone 
and metal objects, were found and dated by the geologist 
Fouqu6, somewhat arbitrarily, to 2000 B.C., by consideration 
of the superincumbent eruptive stratum. Meanwhile, in 1868, 
tombs at Ialysus in Rhodes had yielded to M. A. Biliotti many 
fine painted vases of styles which were called later the third and 
fourth " Mycenaean "; but these, bought by John Ruskin, and 
presented to the British Museum, excited less attention than 
they deserved, being supposed to be of some local Asiatic fabric 
of uncertain date. Nor was a connexion immediately detected 
between them and the objects found four years later in a tomb 
at Menidi in Attica and a rock-cut " bee-hive " grave near the 
Argive Heraeum. 

Even Schliemann's first excavations at Hissarlik in the Troad 
(q.v.) did not excite surprise. But the " Burnt City " of his 
second stratum, revealed in 1873, with its fortifications and 
vases, and a hoard of gold, silver and bronze objects, which the 
discoverer connected with it, began to arouse a curiosity which 
was destined presently to spread far outside the narrow circle 
of scholars. As soon as Schliemann came on the Mycenae graves 
three years later, light poured from all sides on the prehistoric 
period of Greece. It was recognized that the character of both 
the fabric and the decoration of the Mycenaean objects was not 
that of any well-known art. A wide range in space was proved 
by the identification of the Inselsteine and the Ialysus vases with 
the new style, and a wide range in time by collation of the earlier 
Theraean and Hissarlik discoveries. A relation between objects 
of art described by Homer and the Mycenaean treasure was 
generally allowed, and a correct opinion prevailed that, while 
certainly posterior, the civilization of the Iliad was reminiscent 
of the Mycenaean. Schliemann got to work again at Hissarlik 
in 1878, and greatly increased our knowledge of the lower strata, 
but did not recognize the Aegean remains in his " Lydian" city 
of the sixth stratum, which were not to be fully revealed till 
Dr W. Dorpfeld resumed the work at Hissarlik in 1892 after the 
first explorer's death (see Troad). But by laying bare in 1884 
the upper stratum of remains on the rock of Tiryns (q.v.), Schlie- 
mann made a contribution to our knowledge of prehistoric 
domestic life which was amplified two years later by Chr. 
Tsountas's discovery of the Mycenae palace. Schliemann's work 
at Tiryns was not resumed till 1905, when it was proved, as 
had long been suspected, that an earlier palace underlies the one 
he had exposed. From 1886 dates the finding of Mycenaean 
sepulchres outside the Argolid, from which, and from the con- 
tinuation of Tsountas's exploration of the buildings and lesser 
graves at Mycenae, a large treasure, independent of Schliemann's 
princely gift, has been gathered into the National Museum at 
Athens. In that year were excavated dome-tombs, most already 
rifled but retaining some of their furniture, at Arkina and Eleusis 
in Attica, at Dimini near Volo in Thessaly, at Kampos on the 
west of Mount Taygetus, and at Maskarata in Cephalonia. The 
richest grave of all was explored at Vaphio in Laconia in 1889, 
and yielded, besides many gems and miscellaneous goldsmiths' 
work, two golden goblets chased with scenes of bull-hunting, 
and certain broken vases painted in a large bold style which 
remained an enigma till the excavation of Cnossus. In 1890 and 
1893 Staes cleared out certain less rich dome-tombs at Thoricus 
in Attica; and other graves, either rock-cut " bee-hives " or 
chambers, were found at Spata and Aphidna in Attica, in Aegina 
and Salamis, at the Heraeum (see Argos) and Nauplia in the 
Argolid, near Thebes and Delphi, and not far from the Thessalian 
Larissa. During the excavations on the Acropolis at Athens, 
terminated in 1888, many potsherds of the Mycenaean style 
were found; but Olympia had yielded either none, or such as 
had not been recognized before being thrown away, and the 
temple site at Delphi produced nothing distinctively Aegean. 
The American explorations of the Argive Heraeum, concluded 
in 1895, also failed to prove that site to have been important in 
the prehistoric time, though, as was to be expected from its 
neighbourhood to Mycenae itself, there were traces of occupation 
in the later Aegean periods. Prehistoric research had now begun 
to extend beyond the Greek mainland. Certain central Aegean 



246 



AEGEAN CIVILIZATION 



islands, Antiparos, Ios, Amorgos, Syros and Siphnos, were all 
found to be singularly rich in evidence of the middle-Aegean 
period. The series of Syran built graves, containing crouching 
corpses, is the best and most representative that is known in the 
Aegean. Melos, long marked as a source of early objects, but 
not systematically excavated until taken in hand by the British 
School at Athens in 1896, yielded at Phylakope remains of all 
the Aegean periods, except the Neolithic. A map of Cyprus in 
the later Bronze Age (such as is given by J. L. Myres and M. O. 
Richter in Catalogue of the Cyprus Museum) shows more than 
five-and-twenty settlements in and about the Mesaorea district 
alone, of which one, that at Enkomi, near the site of Salamis, 
has yielded the richest Aegean treasure in precious metal found 
outside Mycenae. E. Chantre in 1894 picked up lustreless ware, 
like that of Hissarlik, in central Phrygia and at Pteria (q.v.), and 
the English archaeological expeditions, sent subsequently into 
north-western Anatolia, have never failed to bring back ceramic 
specimens of Aegean appearance from the valleys of the Rhyn- 
dacus, Sangarius and Halys. In Egypt in 1887 W. M. F. Petrie 
found painted sherds of Cretan style at Kahun in the Fayum, and 
farther up the Nile, at Tell el-Amarna, chanced on bits of no 
fewer than 800 Aegean vases in 1889. There have now been 
recognized in the collections at Cairo, Florence, London, Paris 
and Bologna several Egyptian imitations of the Aegean style 
which can be sjet off against the many debts which the centres of 
Aegean culture owed to Egypt. Two Aegean vases were found 
at Sidon in 1885, and many fragments of Aegean and especially 
Cypriote pottery have been turned up during recent excavations 
of sites in Philistia by the Palestine Fund. South-eastern Sicily, 
ever since P. Orsi excavated the Sicel cemetery near Lentini in 

1877, has proved a mine of early remains, among which appear 
in regular succession Aegean fabrics and motives of decoration 
from the period of the second stratum at Hissarlik. Sardinia 
has Aegean sites, e.g. at Abini near Teti; and Spain has yielded 
objects recognized as Aegean from tombs near Cadiz and from 
Saragossa. One land, however, has eclipsed all others in the 
Aegean by the wealth of its remains of all the prehistoric ages, 
viz. Crete, so much so that, for the present, we must regard it as 
the fountain-head of Aegean civilization, and probably .for long 
its political and social centre. The island first attracted the 
notice of archaeologists by the remarkable archaic Greek bronzes 
found in a cave on Mount Ida in 1885, as well as by epigraphic 
monuments such as the famous law of Gortyna; but the first 
undoubted Aegean remains reported from it were a few objects 
extracted from Cnossus by Minos Kalokhairinos of Candia in 

1878. These were followed by certain discoveries made in the 
S. plain (Messara) by F. Halbherr. W. J. Stillman and H- 
Schliemann both made unsuccessful attempts at Cnossus, and 
A. J. Evans, coming on the scene in 1893, travelled in succeed- 
ing years about the island picking up trifles of unconsidered 
evidence, which gradually convinced him that greater things 
would eventually be found. He obtained enough to enable him 
to forecast the discovery of written characters, till then not sus- 
pected in Aegean civilization. The revolution of 1897-98 opened 
the door to wider knowledge, and much exploration has ensued, 
for which see Crete. Thus the " Aegean Area " has now come 
to mean the Archipelago with Crete and Cyprus, the Hellenic 
peninsula with the Ionian isles, and Western Anatolia. Evidence 
is still wanting for the Macedonian and Thracian coasts. Off- 
shoots are found in the W. Mediterranean, in Sicily, Italy, 
Sardinia and Spain, and in the E. in Syria and Egypt. About 
the Cyrenaica we are still insufficiently informed. 

II. General Nature 0} the Evidence. — For details of monumental 
evidence the articles on Crete, Mycenae, Tiryns, Troad, 
Cyprus, &c, must be consulted. The most representative site 
explored up to now is Cnossus (see Crete, sect. Archaeology) , 
which has yielded not only the most various but the most 
continuous evidence from the Neolithic age to the twilight 
of classical civilization. Next in importance come Hissarlik, 
Mycenae, Phaestus, Hagia, Triada, Tiryns, Phylakope, Palai- 
kastro and Gournia. 

A. The internal evidence at present available comprises — 



(1) Structures. — Ruins of palaces, palatial villas, houses, built 
dome- or cist-graves and fortifications (Aegean isles, Greek 
mainland and N.W. Anatolia), but not distinct temples; small 
shrines, however, and temeni (religious enclosures, remains of 
one of which were probably found at Petsofa near Palaikastro 
by J. L. Myres in 1904) are represented on intaglios and 
frescoes. From like sources and from inlay-work we have also 
representations of palaces and houses. 

(2) Structural. Decoration. — Architectural features, such as 
columns, friezes and various mouldings; mural decoration, 
such as fresco-paintings, coloured reliefs and mosaic inlay. 

(3) Furniture, — (a) Domestic, such as vessels of all sorts and 
in many materials, from huge store-jars down to tiny unguent- 
pots; culinary and other implements; thrones, seats, tables, 
&c, these all in stone or plastered terra-cotta. (b) Sacred, 
such as models or actual examples of ritual objects; of these 
we have also numerous pictorial representations, (c) Funerary, 
e.g. coffins in painted terra-cotta. 

(4) Artistic fabrics, e.g. plastic objects, carved in stone or ivory, 
cast or beaten in metals (gold, silver, copper and bronze), or 
modelled in clay, faience, paste, &c. Very little trace has yet 
been found of large free sculpture, but many examples exist of 
sculptors' smaller work. Vases of all kinds, carved in marble 
or other stones, cast or beaten in metals or fashioned in clay, 
the latter in enormous number and variety, richly ornamented 
with coloured schemes, and sometimes bearing moulded decora- 
tion. Examples of painting on stone, opaque and transparent. 
Engraved objects in great number, e.g. ring-bezels and gems; 
and an immense quantity of clay impressions, taken from these. 

(5) Weapons, tools and implements, in stone, clay and bronze, 
and at the last iron, sometimes richly ornamented or inlaid. 
Numerous representations also of the same. No actual body- 
armour, except suGh as was ceremonial and buried with the dead, 
like the gold breastplates in the circle-graves at Mycenae. 

(6) Articles of personal use, e.g. brooches (fibulae), pins, razors, 
tweezers, &c, often found as dedications to a deity, e.g. in the 
Dictaean Cavern of Crete. No textiles have survived. 

(7) Written documents, e.g. clay tablets and discs (so far in 
Crete only) , but nothing of more perishable nature, such as skin, 
papyrus, &c. ; engraved gems and gem impressions; legends 
written with pigment on pottery (rare); characters incised on 
stone or pottery. These show two main systems of script (see 
Crete). 

(8) Excavated tombs, of either the pit or the grotto kind, in 
which the dead were laid, together with various objects of use 
and luxury, without cremation, and in either coffins or loculi or 
simple wrappings. 

(9) Public works, such as paved and stepped roadways, 
bridges, systems of drainage, &c. 

B. There-is also a certain amount of external evidence to be 
gathered from— 

(1) Monuments and records of other contemporary civiliza- 
tions, e.g. representations of alien peoples in Egyptian frescoes; 
imitation of Aegean fabrics and style in non-Aegean lands; 
allusions to Mediterranean peoples in Egyptian, Semitic or 
Babylonian records. 

(2) Literary traditions of subsequent civilizations, especially 
the Hellenic, such as, e.g., those embodied in the Homeric poems, 
the legends concerning Crete, Mycenae, &c; statements as to 
the origin of gods, cults and so forth, transmitted to us by 
Hellenic antiquarians such as Strabo, Pausanias, Diodorus 
Siculus, &c. 

(3) Traces of customs, creeds, rituals, &c, in the Aegean 
area at a later time, discordant with the civilization in which 
they were practised and indicating survival from earlier systems. 
There are also possible linguistic and even physical survivals to 
be considered. 

III. General Features of Aegean Civilization. — The leading 
features of Aegean civilization, as deduced from the evidence, 
must be stated very briefly. 

(1) Political Organization.— -The great Cretan palaces and 
the fortified citadels of Mycenae, Tiryns and Hissarlik, each 



AEGEAN CIVILIZATION 

GRAPHIC ART 



Plate f 




Fig. i— FLYING FISH FRESCO, PHYLAKOPI. 

Cf. J.B.S. Suppl. Papers, iv. 



Fig. 2— BULL, WITH LEAPING BULL-FIGHTER, TIRYNS. 

Cf. Schlicmann, Tiryns, Plate XIII. 





Fig. 4.— MIDDLE MINOAN VASE, CNOSSUS. 

B.S.A. is.. 120, Fig. 75. 



'*''+*? 
*'#' 



mm 









Fig. 3.— LAMP-STAND, PHYLAKOPI. Fig. 5.— MINIATURE FRESCOES, SHOW- Fig. 6— FILLER VASE, ZAKRO. 



3- 

Cf. J.H.S. Suppl. Papers, iv. Plate XXII. 
I. 246. 



ING SPECTATORS AT ATHLETIC J.H.S. vol. X xii. plate XII. 

SPORTS, CNOSSUS. 

From Photo by Dr A. J. Evans. 

By permission of the Society for the Promotion of Hellenic Studies. 



Plate II. 



AEGEAN CIVILIZATION 

PLASTIC ART 





Fig. 2.— MARBLE IDOLS, AMORGOS; 6-u. FIDDLE 
AND MALLET TYPES, 12-14, DEVELOPED TYPES. 

Man, 1901, 185, No 146. 

By permission of the Royal Anthropological Institute. 



Fig. i— FAIENCE PLAGUE, CNOSSUS. 

B.S.A. a. Plate III. 




Fig. ■x —COLOURED BAS-RELIEF IN GESSO Fig. 4 — MARBLE HEAD 

DURO, REPRESENTING MALE FOSSO FROM AMORGOS (ASH- mIHT[ . n m .___,_, rM ^..,, 

WITH FLEUR-DE-LIS COLLAR. MOLEAN MUSEUM). Fig. 5— BULL IN PAINTED PLASTER, CNOoSUS 

B.S.A. vii. 17. Fig. 6. Ph"'" ''y Dr A - J- Evans - 





Figs 6 7— IVORY FIGURES AND HEADS OF ATHLETES, BULL-FIGHTERS OR ACROBATS, CNOSSUS. 

B.S.A. viii. Plates II. and III., and p. 72 sq. 

By permission of the Society for the Promotion of Hellenic Studies. 



AEGEAN CIVILIZATION 



247 




Map showing the distribution of 
AEGEAN SITES 



Cnosstis* 
... _ iSfH, 
PhaestusJ 



•ear 



containing little more than one great residence, and dominating 
lower towns of meaner houses, point to monarchy at all periods. 
Independent local developments of art before the middle of the 
2nd millennium B.C. suggest the early existence of independent 
units in various parts, of which the strongest was the Cnossian. 
After that date the evidence goes strongly to show that one 
political dominion was spread for a brief period, or for two brief 
periods, over almost all the area (see later). The great number 
of tribute-tallies found at Cnossus perhaps indicates that the 
centre of power was always there. . 

(2) Religion. — The fact that shrines have so far been found 
within palaces and not certainly anywhere else indicates that 
the kings kept religious power in their own hands; perhaps 
they were themselves high-priests. Religion in the area seems 
to have been essentially the same everywhere from the earliest 
period, viz. the cult of a Divine Principle, resident in dominant 
features of nature (sun, stars, mountains, trees, &c.) and control- 
ling fertility. This cult passed through an aniconic stage, from 
which fetishes survived to the last, these being rocks or pillars, 
trees, weapons (e.g. bipennis, or double war-axe, shield), &c. 
When the iconic stage was reached, about 2000 B.C., we find the 
Divine Spirit represented as a goddess with a subordinate young 
god, as in many other E. Mediterranean lands. The god was 
probably son and mate of the goddess, and the divine pair 
represented the genius of Reproductive Fertility in its relations 
with humanity. The goddess sometimes appears with doves, 
as uranic, at others with snakes, as chthonic. In the ritual 
fetishes, often of miniature form, played a great part: all sorts 
of plants and animals were sacred: sacrifice (not burnt, and 
human very doubtful), dedication of all sorts of offerings and 
simulacra, invocation, &c, were practised. The dead, who 
returned to the Great Mother, were objects of a sort of hero- 
worship. This early nature-cult explains many anomalous 
features of Hellenic religion, especially in the cults of Artemis 
and Aphrodite. (See Crete.) 

(3) Social Organization. — There is a possibility that features 
of a primeval matriarchate long survived; but there is no 
certain evidence. Of the organization of the people under the 
monarch we are ignorant. There are so few representations 
of armed men that it seems doubtful if there can have been 
any professional military class. Theatral structures found at 
Cnossus and Phaestus, within the precincts of the palaces, 
were perhaps used for shows or for sittings of a royal assize, 
rather than for popular assemblies. The Cnossian remains 
contain evidence of an elaborate system of registration, account- 
keeping and other secretarial work, which perhaps indicates a 
considerable body of law. The life of the ruling class was 
comfortable and even luxurious from early times. Fine stone 
palaces, richly decorated, with separate sleeping apartments, 



Emery_Wal1cer IB 

large halls, ingenious devices for admitting light and air, sanitary 
conveniences and marvellously modern arrangements for supply 
of water and for drainage, attest this fact. Even the smaller 
houses, after the Neolithic period, seem also to have been of 
stone, plastered within. After 1600 B.C. the palaces in Crete 
had more than one story, fine stairways, bath-chambers, win- 
dows, folding and sliding doors, &c. In this later period, the 
distinction of blocks of apartments in some palaces has been 
held to indicate the seclusion of women in harems, at least 
among the ruling caste. Cnossian frescoes show women grouped 
apart, and they appear alone on gems. Flesh and fish and 
many kinds of vegetables were evidently eaten, and wine and 
beer were drunk. Vessels for culinary, table, and luxurious 
uses show an infinite variety of form and purpose. Artificers' 
implements of many kinds were in use, bronze succeeding 
obsidian and other hard stones as the material. Seats are found 
carefully shaped to the human person. There was evidently 
olive- and vine-culture on a large scale in Crete at any rate. 
Chariots were in use in the later period, as is proved by the 
pictures of them on Cretan tablets, and therefore, probably, 
the horse also was known. Indeed a horse appears on a gem 
impression. Main ways were paved. Sports, probably more 
or less religious, are often represented, e.g. bull-fighting, dancing, 
boxing, armed combats. 

(4) Commerce was practised to some extent in very early 
times, as is proved by the distribution of Melian obsidian over 
all the Aegean area and by the Nilotic influence on early Minoan 
art. We find Cretan vessels exported to Melos, Egypt and the 
Greek mainland. Melian vases came in their turn to Crete. 
After 1600 B.C. there is very close intercourse with Egypt, and 
Aegean things find their way to all coasts of the Mediterranean 
(see below). No traces of currency have come to light, unless 
certain axe-heads, too slight for practical use, had that char- 
acter; but standard weights have been found, and representa- 
tions of ingots. The Aegean written documents have not yet 
proved (by being found outside the area) epistolary correspond- 
ence with other lands. Representations of ships are not common, 
but several have been observed on Aegean gems, gem-sealings 
and vases. They are vessels of low free-board, with masts. 
Familiarity with the sea is proved by the free use of marine 
motives in decoration. 

(5) Treatment of the Dead. — The dead in the earlier period 
were laid (so far as we know at present) within cists constructed 
of upright stones. These were sometimes inside caves. After 
the burial the cist was covered in with earth. A little later, in 
Crete, bone-pits seem to have come into use, containing the 
remains of many burials. Possibly the flesh was boiled off the 
bones at once (" scarification "),. or left to rot in separate cists 
awhile; afterwards the skeletons were collected and the cists 



248 



AEGEAN CIVILIZATION 



re-used. The coffins are of small size, contain corpses with the 
knees drawn up to the chin and are found in excavated chambers 
or pits. In the later period a peculiar " bee-hive " tomb became 
common, sometimes wholly or partly excavated, sometimes (as 
in the magnificent Mycenaean " Treasuries ") constructed dome- 
wise. The shaft-graves in the Mycenae circle are also a late 
type, paralleled in the later Cnossian cemetery. The latest 
type of tomb is a flatly vaulted chamber approached by a 
horizontal or slightly inclined way, whose sides converge above. 
At no period do the Aegean dead seem to have been burned. 
Weapons, food, water, unguents and various trinkets were laid 
with the corpse at all periods. In the Mycenae circle an altar 
seems to have been erected over the graves, and perhaps slaves 
were killed to bear the dead chiefs company. A painted sarco- 
phagus, found at Hagia Triada, also possibly shows a hero-cult 
of the dead. 

(6) Artistic Production. — Ceramic art reached a specially high 
standard in fabric, form and decoration by the middle of the 
3rd millennium B.C. in Crete. The products of that period com- 
pare favourably with any potters' work in the world. The 
same may be said of fresco-painting, and probably of metal 
work. Modelling in terra-cotta, sculpture in stone and ivory, 
engraving on gems, were following it closely by the beginning of 
the 2nd millennium. After 2000 B.C. all these arts revived, and 
sculpture, as evidenced by relief work, both on a large and on a 
small scale, carved stone vessels, metallurgy in gold, silver and 
bronze, advanced farther. This art and those of fresco- and 
vase-painting and of gem-engraving stood higher about the 
15th century B.C. than at any subsequent period before the 6th 
century. The manufacture, modelling and painting of faience 
objects, and the making of inlays in many materials were also 
familiar to Aegean craftsmen, who show in all their best work a 
strong sense of natural form and an appreciation of ideal balance 
and decorative effect, such as are seen in the best products of 
later Hellenic art. Architectural ornament was also highly 
developed. The richness of the Aegean capitals and columns 
may be judged by those from the " Treasury of Atreus " now set 
up in the British Museum; and of the friezes we have examples 
in Mycenaean and Cnossian fragments, and Cnossian paintings. 
The magnificent gold work of the later period, preserved to us at 
Mycenae and Vaphio, needs only to be mentioned. It should be 
compared with stone work in Crete, especially the steatite vases 
with reliefs found at Hagia Triada. On the whole, Aegean art, 
at its two great periods, in the middle of the 3rd and 2nd millennia 
respectively, will bear comparison with any contemporary arts. 

IV. Origin, Nature and History of Aegean Civilization. — The 
evidence, summarized above, though very various and volumin- 
ous, is not yet sufficient to answer all the questions which may 
be asked as to the origin, nature and history of this civilization, 
or to answer any but a few questions with absolute certainty. 
We shall try to indicate the extent to which it can legitimately 
be applied. 

A. Distinctive Features. — The fact that Aegean civilization is 
distinguished from all others, prior or contemporary, not only 
by its geographical area, but by leading organic characteristics, 
has never been in doubt, since its remains came to be studied 
seriously and impartially. The truth was indeed obscured for 
a time by persistent prejudices in favour of certain alien Medi- 
terranean races long known to have been in relation with the 
Aegean area in prehistoric times, e.g. the Egyptians and especi- 
ally the Phoenicians. But their claims to be the principal 
authors of the Aegean remains grew fainter with every fresh 
Aegean discovery, and every new light thrown on their own 
proper products; with the Cretan revelations they ceased 
altogether to be considered except by a few Homeric enthusiasts. 
Briefly, we now know that the Aegean civilization developed 
these distinctive features. (1) An indigenous script expressed 
in characters of which only a very small percentage are identical, 
or even obviously connected, with those of any other script. 
This is equally true both of the pictographic and the linear 
Aegean systems. Its nearest affinities are with the " Asianic " 
scripts, preserved to us by Hittite, Cypriote and south-west 



Anatolian (Pamphylian, Lycian and Carian) inscriptions. But 
neither are these affinities close enough to be of any practical 
aid in deciphering Aegean characters, nor is it by any means 
certain that there is parentage. The Aegean script may be, 
and probably is, prior in origin to the " Asianic "; and it may 
equally well be owed to a remote common ancestor, or (the small 
number of common characters being considered) be an entirely 
independent evolution from representations of natural objects 
(see Crete). (2) An Art, whose products cannot be confounded 
with those of any other known art by a trained eye. Its obliga- 
tions to other contemporary arts are many and obvious, especi- 
ally in its later stages; but every borrowed form and motive 
undergoes an essential modification at the hands of the Aegean 
craftsman, and the product is stamped with a new character. 
The secret of this character lies evidently in a constant attempt 
to express an ideal in forms more and more closely approaching 
to realities. We detect the dawn of that spirit which afterwards 
animated Hellenic art. The fresco-paintings, ceramic motives, 
reliefs, free sculpture and toreutic handiwork of Crete have 
supplied the clearest proof of it, confirming the impression 
already created by the goldsmiths' and painters' work of the 
Greek mainland (Mycenae, Vaphio, Tiryns). (3) Architectural 
plans and decoration. The arrangement of Aegean palaces is 
of two main types. First (and perhaps earliest in time), the 
chambers are grouped round a central court, being engaged one 
with the other in a labyrinthine complexity, and the greater 
oblongs are entered from a long side and divided longitudinally 
by pillars. Second, the main chamber is of what is known as 
the megaron type, i.e. it stands free, isolated from the rest of the 
plan by corridors, is entered from a vestibule on a short side, 
and has a central hearth, surrounded by pillars and perhaps 
hypaethral; there is no central court, and other apartments 
form distinct blocks. For possible geographical reasons for this 
duality of type see Crete. In spite of many comparisons made 
with Egyptian, Babylonian and " Hittite " plans, both these 
arrangements remain incongruous with any remains of prior or 
contemporary structures elsewhere. Whether either plan suits 
the " Homeric palace " does not affect the present question. 
(4) A type of tomb, the dome or " bee-hive," of which the grandest 
examples known are at Mycenae. The Cretan " larnax " coffins, 
also, have no parallels outside the Aegean. There are other 
infinite singularities of detail; but the above are more than 
sufficient to establish the point. 

B. Origin and Continuity. — With the immense expansion of 
the evidence, due to the Cretan excavations, a question has 
arisen how far the Aegean civilization, whose total duration 
covers at least three thousand years, can be regarded as one 
and continuous. Thanks to the exploration of Cnossus, we now 
know that Aegean civilization had its roots in a primitive Neo- 
lithic period, of uncertain but very long duration, represented 
by a stratum which (on that site in particular) is in places nearly 
20 ft. thick, and contains stone implements and sherds of hand- 
made and hand-polished vessels, showing a progressive develop- 
ment in technique from bottom to top. This Cnossian stratum 
seems to be throughout earlier than the lowest layer at Hissarlik. 
It closes with the introduction of incised, white-fijled decoration 
on pottery, whose motives are presently found reproduced in 
monochrome pigment. We are now in the beginning of the 
Bronze Age, and the first of Evans's " Minoan " periods (see 
Crete). Thereafter, by exact observation of stratification, 
eight more periods have been distinguished by the explorer of 
Cnossus, each marked by some important development in the 
universal and necessary products of the potter's art, the least 
destructible and therefore most generally used archaeological 
criterion. These periods fill the whole Bronze Age, with whose 
close, by the introduction of the superior metal, iron, the Aegean 
Age is conventionally held to end. Iron came into general Aegean 
use about 1000 B.C., and possibly was the means by which a 
body of northern invaders established their power on the ruins 
of the earlier dominion. The important point is this, that 
throughout the nine Cnossian periods, following the Neolithic 
Age (nam«d by Evans, " Minoaa I. 1, 2, 3; II. 1, 2, 3; III. 1, 



AEGEAN CIVILIZATION 



249 



2, 3 " ; see Crete), there is evidence of a perfectly orderly 
and continuous evolution in, at any rate, ceramic art. From 
one stage to another, fabrics, forms and motives of decoration 
develop gradually; so that, at the close of a span of more than 
two thousand years, at the least, the influences of the beginning 
can still be clearly seen and no trace of violent artistic intrusion 
can be detected. This fact, by itself, would go far to prove 
that the civilization continued fundamentally and essentially 
the same throughout. It is, moreover, supported by less abun- 
dant remains of other arts. That of painting in fresco, for in- 
stance, shows the same orderly development from at any rate 
Period II. 2 to the end. About institutions we have less certain 
knowledge, there being but little evidence for the earlier periods; 
but in the documents relating to religion, the most significant of 
all, it can at least be said that there is no trace of sharp change. 
We see evidence of a uniform Nature Worship passing through all 
the normal stages down to theoanthropism in the latest period. 
There is no appearance of intrusive deities or cult-ideas. We 
may take it then (and the fact is not disputed even by those 
who, like Dorpfeld, believe in one thorough racial change, at 
least, during the Bronze Age) that the Aegean civilization was 
indigenous, firmly rooted and strong enough to persist essen- 
tially unchanged and dominant in its own geographical area 
throughout the Neolithic and Bronze Ages. This conclusion 
can hardly entail less than a belief that, at any rate, the mass 
of those who-"possessed this civilization continued racially the 
same. 

There are, however, in certain respects at certain periods, 
evidences of such changes as might be due to the intrusion of 
small conquering castes, which adopted the superior civilization 
of the conquered people and became assimilated to the latter. 
The earliest palace at Cnossus was built probably in Period II. 
1 or 2. It was of the type mentioned first in the description 
of palace-plans above. Before Period III. 1 it was largely re- 
built, and arguments have been brought forward by Dorpfeld 
to show that features of the second type were then introduced. 
A similar rebuilding took place at the same epoch at Phaestus, 
and possibly at Hagia Triada. Now the second type, the 
" megaron " arrangement, characterizes peculiarly the palaces 
discovered in the north of the Aegean area, at Mycenae, Tiryns 
and Hissarlik, where up to the present no signs of the first type, 
so characteristic of Crete, have been observed. These northern 
" megara " are all of late date, none being prior to Minoan III. 1. 
At Phylakope, a " megaron " appears only in the uppermost 
Aegean stratum, the underlying structures being more in con- 
formity with the earlier Cretan. At the same epoch a notable 
change took place in the Aegean script. The pictographic 
characters, found on seals and discs of Period II. in Crete, had 
given way entirely to a linear system by Period III. That 
system thenceforward prevailed exclusively, suffering a slight 
modification again in III. 2 and 3. 

These and other less well marked changes, say some critics, 
are signs of a racial convulsion not long after 2000 B.C. An old 
race was conquered by a new, even if, in matters of civilization, 
the former capta victorem cepit. For these races respectively 
Dorpfeld suggests the names " Lycian " and " Carian, " the 
latter coming in from the north Aegean, where Greek tradition 
remembered its former dominance. These names do not greatly 
help us. If we are to accept and profit by Dorpfeld's nomen- 
clature, we must be satisfied that, in their later historic habitats, 
both Lycians and Carians showed unmistakable signs of having 
formerly possessed the civilizations attributed to them in pre- 
historic times — signs which research has hitherto wholly failed 
to find. The most that can be said to be capable of proof is 
the infiltration of some northern influence into Crete at' the end 
of Minoan Period II. ; but it probably brought about no change 
of dynasty and certainly no change in the prevailing race. 

A good deal of anthropometric investigation has been devoted 
to human remains of the Aegean epoch, especially to skulls and 
bones found in Crete in tombs of Period II. The result of this, 
however, has not so far established more than the fact that 
the Aegean races, as a whole, belonged to the dark, long-headed 



Homo Mediterraneus, whose probable origin lay in mid-eastern 
Africa — a fact only valuable in the present connexion in so far 
as it tends to discredit an Asiatic source for Aegean civilization. 
Not enough evidence has been collected to affect the question 
of racial change during the Aegean period. From the skull- 
forms studied, it would appear, as we should expect, that the 
Aegean race was by no means pure even in the earlier Minoan 
periods. It only remains to be added that there is some ground 
for supposing that the language spoken in Crete before the later 
Doric was non-Hellenic, but Indo-European. This inference 
rests on three inscriptions in Greek characters but non-Greek 
language found in E. Crete. The language has some apparent 
affinities with Phrygian. The inscriptions are post-Aegean by 
many centuries, but they occur in the part of the island known 
to Homer as that inhabited by the Eteo-Cretans, or aborigines. 
Their language may prove to be that of the Linear tablets. 

C. History of Aegean Civilization. — History of an inferential 
and summary sort only can be derived from monuments in the 
absence of written records. The latter do, indeed, exist in the 
case of the Cretan civilization and in great numbers; but they 
are undeciphered and likely to remain so, except in the im- 
probable event of the discovery of a long bi-lingual text, partly 
couched in some familiar script and language. Even in that 
event, the information which would be derived from the Cnossian 
tablets would probably make but a small addition to history,, 
since in very large part they are evidently mere inventories of 
tribute and stores. The engraved gems probably record divine 
or human names. (See Crete.) 

(1) Chronology. — The earliest chronological datum that we 
possess is inferred from a close similarity between certain Cretan 
hand-made and polished vases of Minoan Period I. 1 and others 
discovered by Petrie at Abydos in Egypt and referred by. him 
to the 1st Dynasty. He goes so far as to pronounce the latter 
to be Cretan importations, their fabric and forms being unlike 
anything Nilotic. If that be so, the period at which stone im- 
plements were beginning to be superseded by bronze in Crete 
must be dated before 4000 B.C. But it will be remembered that 
below all Evans's " Minoan " strata lies the immensely thick 
Neolithic deposit. To date the beginning of this earliest record 
of human production is impossible at present. The Neolithic 
stratum varies very much in depth, ranging from nearly 20 ft. 
to 3 ft., but is deepest on the highest part of the hillock. Its 
variations may be due equally to natural denudation of a stratum 
once of uniform depth, or to the artificial heaping up of a mound 
by later builders. Even were certainty as to these alternatives 
attained, we could only guess at the average rate of accumula- 
tion, which experience shows to proceed very differently on 
different sites and under different social and climatic conditions. 
In later periods at Cnossus accumulation seems to have proceeded 
at a rate of, roughly, 3 ft. per thousand years. Reckoning by 
that standard we might push the earliest Neolithic remains back 
behind 10,000 B.C.; but the calculation would be worthy of little 
credence. 

Passing by certain fragments of stone vessels, found at Cnossus, 
and coincident with forms characteristic of the IVth Pharaonic 
Dynasty, we reach another fairly certain date in the synchronism 
of remains belonging to the Xllth Dynasty (c. 2500 B.C. accord- 
ing to Petrie, but later according to the Berlin School) with 
products of Minoan Period II. 2. Characteristic Cretan pottery 
of this period was found by Petrie in the Fayum in conjunction 
with XII th Dynasty remains, and various Cretan products of the 
period show striking coincidences with Xllth Dynasty styles, 
especially in their adoption of spiraliform ornament. The spiral, 
however, it must be confessed, occurs so often in natural objects 
(e.g. horns, climbing plants, shavings of wood or metal) that too 
much stress must not be laid on the mutual parentage of spirali- 
form ornament in different civilizations. A diorite statuette, 
referable by its style and inscription to Dynasty XIII., was dis- 
covered in deposit of Period II. .3 in the Central Court, and a 
cartouche of the " Shepherd King," Khyan, was also found at 
Cnossus. He is usually dated about 1900 B.C. This brings us 
to the next and most certain synchronism, that of Minoan Periods 



250 



AEGEAN CIVILIZATION 



III. i, 2, with Dynasty XVIII. (c. 1600-1400 B.C.). This co- 
incidence has been observed not only at Cnossus, but previously, 
in connexion with discoveries of scarabs and other Egyptian 
objects made at Mycenae, Ialysus, Vaphio, &c. In Egypt itself 
Kefti tributaries, bearing vases of Aegean form, and themselves 
similar in fashion of dress arid arrangement of hair to figures on 
Cretan frescoes and gems of Period III., are depicted under this 
and the succeeding Dynasties (e.g. Rekhmara tomb at Thebes). 
Actual vases of late Minoan style have been found with remains 
of Dynasty XVIII., especially in the town of Amenophis IV. 
Akhenaton at Tell el-Amarna; while in the Aegean area itself 
we have abundant evidence of a great wave of Egyptian influence 
beginning with this same Dynasty. To this wave were owed in 
all probability the Nilotic scenes depicted on the Mycenae 
daggers, on frescoes of Hagia Triada and Cnossus, on pottery of 
Zakro, on the shell-relief of Phaestus, &c. ; and also many forms 
and fabrics, e.g. certain Cretan coffins, and the faience industry 
of Cnossus. These serve to date, beyond all reasonable question, 
Periods III. 1-2 in Crete, the shaft-graves in the Mycenae circle, 
the Vaphio tomb, &c, to the 16th and 15th centuries B.C., and 
Period III. 3 with the lower town at Mycenae, the majority of 
the sixth stratum at Hissarlik, the Ialysus burials, the upper 
stratum at Phylakope, &c, to the century immediately suc- 
ceeding. 

The terminus ad quern is less certain — iron does not begin to 
be used for weapons in the Aegean till after Period III. 3, and 
then not exclusively. If we fix its introduction to about 1000 
B.C. and make it coincident with the incursion of northern tribes, 
remembered by the classical Greeks as the Dorian Invasion, we 
must allow that this incursion did not altogether stamp out 
Aegean civilization, at least in the southern part of its area. 
But it finally destroyed the Cnossian palace and initiated the 
" Geometric ,: Age, with which, for convenience at any rate, we 
may close the history of Aegean civilization proper. 

(2) Annals. — From these and other data the outlines of primi- 
tive history in the Aegean may be sketched thus. A people, 
agreeing in its prevailing skull-forms with the Mediterranean 
race of N. Africa, was settled in the Aegean area from a remote 
Neolithic antiquity, but, except in Crete, where insular security 
was combined with great natural fertility, remained in a savage 
and unproductive condition until far into the 4th millennium 
B.C. In Crete, however, it had long been developing a certain 
civilization, and at a period more or less contemporary with 
Dynasties XI. and XII. (2500 B.C. ?) the scattered communities 
of the centre of the island coalesced into a strong monarchical 
state, whose capital was at Cnossus. There the king, probably 
also high priest of the prevailing nature-cult, built a great stone 
palace, and received the tribute of feudatories, of whom, prob- 
ably, the prince of Phaestus, who commanded the Messara plain, 
was chief. The Cnossian monarch had maritime relations with 
Egypt, and presently sent his wares all over the S. Aegean (e.g. 
to Melos in the earlier Second City Period of Phylakope) and to 
Cyprus, receiving in return such commodities as Melian obsidian 
knives. A system of pictographic writing came into use early 
in this Palace period, but only a few documents, made of durable 
material, have survived. Pictorial art of a purely indigenous 
character, whether on ceramic material or plaster, made great 
strides, and from ceramic forms we may legitimately infer also 
a high skill in metallurgy. The absence of fortifications both 
at Cnossus and Phaestus suggest that at this time Crete was in- 
ternally peaceful and externally secure. Small settlements, in 
very close relation with the capital, were founded in the east of 
the island to command fertile districts and assist maritime 
commerce. Gournia and Palaikastro fulfilled both these ends: 
Zakro must have had mainly a commercial purpose, as the 
starting-point for the African coast. The acme of this dominion 
was reached about the end of the 3rd millennium B.C., and there- 
after there ensued a certain, though not very serious, decline. 
Meanwhile, at other favourable spots in the Aegean, but chiefly, 
it appears, on sites in easy relation to maritime commerce, e.g. 
Tiryns and Hissarlik, other communities of the early race began 
to arrive at civilization, but were naturally influenced by the 



more advanced culture of Crete, in proportion to their nearness 
of vicinity. Early Hissarlik shows less Cretan influence and 
more external (i.e. Asiatic) than early Melos. The inner Greek 
mainland remained still' in a backward state. Five hundred 
years later— about 1600 B.C. — we observe that certain striking 
changes have taken place. The Aegean remains have become 
astonishingly uniform over the whole area; the local ceramic 
developments have almost ceased and been replaced by ware of 
one general type both of fabric and decoration. The Cretans 
have stayed their previous decadence, and are once more pos- 
sessors of a progressive civilization. They have developed a 
more convenient and expressive written character by stages of 
which one is best represented by the tablets of Hagia Triada. 
The art of all the area gives evidence of one spirit and common 
models ; in religious representations it shows the same anthropo- 
morphic personification and the same ritual furniture. Objects 
produced in one locality are found in others. The area of Aegean 
intercourse has widened and become more busy. Commerce 
with Egypt, for example, has increased in a marked degree, and 
Aegean objects or imitations of them are found to have begun 
to penetrate into Syria, inland Asia Minor, and the central and 
western Mediterranean lands, e.g. Sicily, Sardinia and Spain. 
There can be little doubt that a strong power was now fixed in one 
Aegean centre, and that all the area had come under its political, 
social and artistic influence. 

How was this brought about, and what was the imperial 
centre? Some change seems to have come from the north; 
and there are those who go so far as to say that the centre 
henceforward was the Argolid, and especially " golden " Mycenae, 
whose lords imposed a new type of palace and a modification 
of Aegean art on all other Aegean lands. Others again cite the 
old-established power and productivity of Crete; the immense 
advantage it derived from insularity, natural fertility and geo- 
graphical relation to the wider area of east Mediterranean 
civilizations; and the absence of evidence elsewhere for the 
gradual growth of a culture powerful enough to dominate the 
Aegean. They point to the fact that, even in the new period, the 
palm for wealth and variety of civilized production still remained 
with Crete. There alone we have proof that the art of writing 
was commonly practised, and there tribute- tallies suggest an 
imperial organization; there the arts of painting and sculpture 
in stone were most highly developed ; there the royal residences, 
which had never been violently destroyed, though remodelled, 
continued unfortified; whereas on the Greek mainland they 
required strong protective works. The golden treasure of the 
Mycenae graves, these critics urge, is not more splendid than 
would have been found at Cnossus had royal burials been spared 
by plunderers, or been happened upon intact by modern ex- 
plorers. It is not impossible to combine these views, and place 
the seat of power still in Crete, but ascribe the Renascence there 
to an influx of new blood from the north, large enough to instil 
fresh vigour, but too small to change the civilization in its 
essential character. 

If this dominance was Cretan, it was short-lived. The security 
of the island was apparently violated not long after 1500 B.C., 
the Cnossian palace was sacked and burned, and Cretan art 
suffered an irreparable blow. As the comparatively lifeless 
character which it possesses in the succeeding period (III. 3) 
is coincident with a similar decadence all over the Aegean area, 
we can hardly escape from the conclusion that it was due to the 
invasion of all the Aegean lands (or at least the Greek mainland 
and isles) by some less civilized conquerors, who remained 
politically dominant, but, like their forerunners, having no 
culture of their own, adopted, while they spoiled, that which 
they found. Who these were we cannot say; but the prob- 
ability is that they too came from the north, and were pre- 
cursors of the later " Hellenes." Under their rule peace was 
re-established, and art production became again abundant 
among the subject population, though of inferior quality. The 
Cnossian palace was re-occupied in its northern part by chieftains 
who have left numerous rich graves; and general commercial 
intercourse must have been resumed, for the uniformity of the 



AEGEAN CIVILIZATION religion plmeiii. 




Fig. i— LION-GUARDED GODDESS AND Fig. 2.— MALE DIVINITY BE- Fig. 3.— GOLD SIGNET FROM ACROPOLIS 
SHRINE, ON A CLAY SEALING FROM TWEEN LIONS, ON A LENTOID TREASURE, MYCENAE, SHOWING THE GOD 
CNOSSUS. GEM FROM KYDONIA, CRETE. DESS BENEATH A SACRED TREE, WITH 

B.S.A.™. a g,F,' e . 9 . J.tr.S.™. 163.Fig.43. ADORANTS AND SACRED EMBLEMS. 

J.H.S. xxi. 108, Fig, 4. 







if 
m 



'msmk 






Fig. 4.— BIRDS ON A TRIAD OF 
PILLARS, CNOSSUS. 

B.S.A. viii. 29, Fig. 14. 



Fig. 5.— CLAY SEALINGS FROM ZAKRO, WITH MINOTAUR TYPES. 

B.S.A. vii. 133, Fig. 45. 



By permission of 

the Society for 

the Promotion 

of Hellenic 

Studies. 





Fig. 6— DUAL PILLAR WORSHIP, ON A GOLD SIGNET 
RING, CNOSSUS. 

J.H.S. jim. 170, Fig. 48. 




Fig. 7.— FAIENCE FIGURE OF THE GODDESS, WITH Fig. 8— FACADE OF SMALL TEMPLES, COMPLETED 
SERPENT ATTRIBUTES, CNOSSUS. FROM A FRESCO PAINTING, CNOSSUS. 



B.S.A. ix. 75, Fig. 54. 



J.H.S. xxi. iq3. Fig. 66. 



Plate, IV 



AEGEAN CIVILIZATION TYPES AND COSTUMES, ETC. 




N< 



1 




Fig i —TESSERAE OF PORCELAIN MOSAIC IN FORM OF HOUSES 
AND TOWERS, CNOSSUS. B.S.A ym.ij,Fis-s. 



Fig. 2.— CUP-BEARER, CNOSSUS. 

Photo by Dr A. J. Evans. 






Figs. 3, 5.— IVORY HEADS 
FROM SP ATA (ATTICA). 

Reichei, Homerische Wofien, 1901, p. 103- 
By permission of A. Holder, Vienna. 



Fig. 4.— FRESCO PAINTING 
OF GIRL, CNOSSUS. 

B.S.A. vii. 57, Fig. 17. 



Fig. 5 — Sco Fig. 3. 




Fig. 6— FAIENCE FIGURE 
OF FEMALE VOTARY 
OF SNAKE-GODDESS, 
CNOSSUS. 

B.S.A. ix. 77, Fig. 56. 



Fig. 7— KEFTIU (CRETAN) 
BEARING AEGEAN 
VASE AS TRIBUTE TO 
PHARAOH. 

From H. R. Hall, Oldest Civilization 
inCrecce (1001). 

By permission of the Society for the 
Promotion of Hellenic Studies. 




js^fSfeg ;' - j : -J MbsM, 



AEGEAN SEA— AEGINA 



25* 



decadent Aegean products and their wide distribution become 
more marked than ever. 

About 1000 B.C. there happened a final catastrophe. The 
palace at Cnossus was once more destroyed, and never rebuilt 
or re-inhabited. Iron took the place of Bronze, and Aegean art, 
as a living thing, ceased on the Greek mainland and in the Aegean 
isles including Crete, together with Aegean writing. In Cyprus, 
and perhaps on the south-west Anatolian coasts, there is some 
reason to think that the cataclysm was less complete, and Aegean 
art continued to languish, cut off from its fountain-head. Such 
artistic faculty as survived elsewhere issued in the lifeless 
geometric style which is reminiscent of the later Aegean, but 
wholly unworthy of it. Cremation took the place of burial of 
the dead. This great disaster, which cleared the ground for 
a new growth of local art, was probably due to yet another in- 
cursion of northern tribes, more barbarous than their predecessors, 
but possessed of superior iron weapons — those tribes which later 
Greek tradition and Homer knew as the Dorians. They crushed 
a civilization already hard hit; and it took two or three centuries 
for the artistic spirit, instinct in the Aegean area, and probably 
preserved in suspended animation by the survival of Aegean 
racial elements, to blossom anew. On this conquest seems to 
have ensued a long period of unrest and popular movements, 
known to Greek tradition as the Ionian Migration and the Aeolic 
and Dorian " colonizations "; and when once more we see the 
Aegean area clearly, it is dominated by Hellenes, though it has 
not lost all memory of its earlier culture. 

Bibliography. — Much of the evidence is contained in archaeo- 
logical periodicals, especially Annual of (he British School at Athens 
(1900- ); Monumenli Antichi and Rendiconti d. R. Ac. d. Lincei 
(1901- ); Ephemeris Archaiologike (1885- ); Journal of 
Hellenic Studies, Alhenische Mittheilungen, Bulletin de correspondance 
hellenique, American Journal of Archaeology, &c. (all since about 
1885). Special Works: H. Schliemann's books (seeScHLiEMANN), 
summarized by C. Schuchhardt, Schliemann's Excavations (1891); 
Chr. Tsountas, Mv/ojccu (1893); Chr. Tsountas and J. I. Manatt, 
The Mycenaean Age (1897) ; G. Perrot and Ch. Chipiez, Histoire de 
I' art dans I'antiquite, vol. vi. (1895); W. Dorpfeld, Troja (1893) and 
Troja und Ilios (1904) ; A. Furtwangler and G. Loschke, Mykenische 
Vasen (1886); A. S. Murray, Excavations in Cyprus (1900); W. 
Ridgeway, Early Age of Greece (1901 foil.); H. R. Hall, The Oldest 
Civilization of Greece (1901); A. J. Evans, " Mycenaean Tree and 
Pillar Cult " in Journ. Hell. Studies (1901) and " Prehistoric Tombs 
of Knossos " in Archaeologia (1905); P. Noack, Homerische Paldsie 
(1903) ; Excavations at Phylahopi, by members of the British 
School at Athens (1904) ; Harriet A. Boyd (Mrs Hawes), Excavations 
at Gournia (1907) ; D. G. Hogarth, " Aegean Religion " in 
Hastings' Did. of Religions (1906). For a recent view of the place 
of Aegean civilization in the history of Hellenic culture see Die 
Hellenische Kultur by F. Baumgarten, &c. (1905). Various 
summaries, controversial articles, &c, formerly quoted, are now 
superseded by recent discoveries. See also Crete, Mycenae, 
Troad, Ceramics, Plate, &c. (D. G. H.) 

AEGEAN SEA, a part of the Mediterranean Sea, being the 
archipelago between Greece on the west and Asia Minor on the 
east, bounded N. by European Turkey, and connected by the 
Dardanelles with the Sea of Marmora, and so with the Black Sea. 
The name Archipelago (q.v.) was formerly applied specifically to 
this sea. The origin of the name Aegean is uncertain. Various 
derivations are given by the ancient grammarians — one from 
the town of Aegae ; another from Aegea, a queen of the Amazons 
who perished in this sea; and a third from Aegeus, the father 
of Theseus, who, supposing his son dead, drowned himself in it. 
The following are the chief islands: — Thasos, in the extreme 
north, off the Macedonian coast; Samothrace, fronting the 
Gulf of Saros; Imbros and Lemnos, in prolongation of the 
peninsula of Gallipoli ( Thracian Chersonese) ; Euboea, the largest 
of all, lying close along the east coast of Greece; the Northern 
Sporades, including Sciathos, Scopelos and Halonesos, running 
out from the southern extremity of the Thessalian coast, and 
Scyros, with its satellites, north-east of Euboea; Lesbos and 
Chios; Samos and Nikaria; Cos, with Calymnos to the north; 
all off Asia Minor, with the many other islands of the Sporades; 
and, finally, the great group of the Cyclades, of which the largest 
are Andros and Tenos, Naxos and Paros. Many of the Aegean 
islands, or chains of islands, are actually prolongations of pro- 
montories of the mainland. Two main chains extend right 



across the sea — the one through Scyros and Psara (between which 
shallow banks intervene) to Chios and the hammer-shaped 
promontory east of it; and the other running from the south- 
eastern promontory of Euboea and continuing the axis of that 
island, in a southward curve through Andros, Tenos, Myconos, 
Nikaria and Samos. A third curve, from the south-easternmost 
promontory of the Peloponnese through Cerigo, Crete, Carpathos 
and Rhodes, marks off the outer deeps of the open Mediterranean 
from the shallow seas of the archipelago, but the Cretan Sea, in 
which depths occur over 1000 fathoms, intervenes, north of the 
line, between it and the Aegean proper. The Aegean itself is 
naturally divided by the island-chains and the ridges from which 
they rise into a series of basins or troughs, the deepest of which 
is that in the north, extending from the coast of Thessaly to 
the Gulf of Saros, and demarcated southward by the Northern 
Sporades, Lemnos, Imbros and the peninsula of Gallipoli. The 
greater part of this trough is over 600 fathoms deep. The pro- 
fusion of islands and their usually bold elevation give beauty 
and picturesqueness to the sea, but its navigation is difficult 
and dangerous, notwithstanding the large number of safe and 
commodious gulfs and bays. Many of the islands are of volcanic 
formation; and a well-defined volcanic chain bounds the Cretan 
Sea on the north, including Milo and Kimolos, Santorin (Thera) 
and Therasia, and extends to Nisyros. Others, such as Paros, 
are mainly composed of marble, and iron ore occurs in some. 
The larger islands have some fertile and well-watered valleys 
and plains. The chief productions are wheat, wine, oil, mastic, 
figs, raisins, honey, wax, cotton and silk. The people are em- 
ployed in fishing for coral and sponges, as well as for bream, 
mullet and other fish. The men are hardy, well built and hand- 
some; and the women are noted for their beauty, the ancient 
Greek type being well preserved. The Cyclades and Northern 
Sporades, with Euboea and small islands under the Greek shore, 
belong to Greece; the other islands to Turkey. 

AEGEUS, in Greek legend, son of Pandion and grandson of 
Cecrops, was king of Athens and the father of Theseus. He was 
deposed by his nephews, but Theseus defeated them and re- 
instated his father. When Theseus set out for Crete to deliver 
Athens from the tribute to the Minotaur he promised Aegeus 
that, if he were successful, he would change the black sail carried 
by his ship for a white one. But, on his return, he forgot to 
hoist the white sail, and his father, supposing that his son had 
lost his life, threw himself from a high rock on which he was 
keeping watch into the sea, which was afterwards called the 
Aegean. The Athenians honoured him with a statue and a 
shrine, and one of the Attic demes was named after him. 

Plutarch, Theseus; Pausanias i. 22; Hyginus, Fab. 43; Catullus 
lxiv. 207. 

AEGINA (Egina or Engia), an island of Greece in the Saronic 
Gulf, 20 m. from the Peiraeus. Tradition derives the name from 
Aegina, the mother of Aeacus, who was born in and ruled the 
island. In shape Aegina is triangular, 8 m. long from N.W. to 
S.E., and 6 m. broad, with an area of about 41 sq. m. The 
western side consists of stony but fertile plains, which are well 
cultivated and produce luxuriant crops of grain, with some cotton, 
vines, almonds and figs. The rest of the island is rugged and 
mountainous. The southern end rises in the conical Mount Oros, 
and the Panhellenian ridge stretches northward with narrow 
fertile valleys on either side. From the absence of marshes the 
climate is the most healthy in Greece. The island forms part 
of the modern nomas of Attica and Boeotia, of which it forms 
an eparchy. The sponge fisheries are of considerable importance. 
The chief town is Aegina, situated at the north-west end of the 
island, the summer residence of many Athenian merchants. 
Capo d'Istria, to whom there is a statue in the principal square, 
erected there a large building, intended for a barracks, which was 
subsequently used as a museum, a library and a school. The 
museum was the first institution of its kind in Greece, but the 
collection was transferred to Athens in 1834. 

Antiquities. — The archaeological interest of Aegina is centred 
in the well-known temple on the ridge near the northern corner 
of the island. .Excavations were made on its site in 18 jr, by 



252 



AEGINA 



Baron Haller von Hallerstein and the English architect C. R. 
Cockerell, who discovered a considerable amount of sculpture 
from the pediments, which was bought in 1812 by the crown 
prince Louis of Bavaria; the groups were set up in the Glypto- 
thek at Munich after the figures had been restored by B. Thor- 
valdsen. Their restoration was somewhat drastic, the ancient 
parts being cut away to allow of additions in marble, and 
the new parts treated in imitation of the ancient weathering. 
Various conjectures were made as to the arrangement of the 
figures. That according to which they were set up at Munich 
was in the main suggested by Cockerell; in the middle of each 
pediment was a figure of Athena, set well back, and a fallen 
warrior at her feet; on each side were standing spearmen, kneel- 
ing spearmen and bowmen, all facing towards the centre of the 
composition ; the corners were filled with fallen warriors. In 1001 
Professor Furtwangler began a more systematic excavation of 
the site, and the new discoveries he then made, together with a 
fresh and complete study of the figures and fragments in Munich, 
have led to a rearrangement of the whole, which, if not certain 
in all details, may be regarded as approaching finality. Accord- 
ing to this the figures of combatants do not all face towards 
the centre, but are broken up, as in other early compositions, 
into a series of groups of two or three figures each. A figuoe of 
Athena still occupies the centre of each pediment, but is set 
farther forward than in the old reconstruction. On each side of 
this, in the western pediment, is a group of two combatants 
over a fallen warrior; in the eastern pediment, a warrior whose 
opponent is falling into the arms of a supporting figure; other 
figures also — the bowmen especially — face towards the angles, 
and so give more variety to the composition. The western 
pediment, which is more conservative in type, represents the 
earlier expedition of Heracles and Telamon against Troy; the 
eastern, which is bolder and more advanced, probably refers to 
episodes in the Trojan war. There are also remains of a third 
pediment, which may have been produced in competition, but 
never placed on the temple. For the character of the sculptures 
see Greek Art. The plan of the temple is chiefly remarkable 
for the unsymmetrically placed door leading from the back of the 
cella into the opisthodomus. This opisthodomus was completely 
fenced in with bronze gratings; and the excavators believe it 
to have been adapted for use as an adytum (shrine). 

It was disputed in earlier times whether the temple was 
dedicated to Zeus or Athena. Inscriptions found by the recent 
excavations seem to prove that it must be identified as the shrine 
of the local goddess Aphaea, identified by Pausanias with 
Britomartis and Dictynna. 

The excavations have laid bare several other buildings, includ- 
ing an altar, early propylaea, houses for the priests and remains 
of an earlier temple. The present temple probably dates from 
the time of the Persian wars. In the town of Aegina itself are 
the remains of another temple, dedicated to Aphrodite; one 
column of this still remains standing, and its foundations are 
fairly preserved. 

Authorities. — Antiquities of Ionia (London, 1797), ii. pi. ii.-vii.; 
C. R. Cockerell, The Temples of Jupiter Panhellenius at Aegina, &c. 
(London, i860); Ch. Gamier, Le Temple de Jupiter Panhellenien d, 
Egine (Paris, 1884); Ad. Furtwangler and others, Aegina, Heiligtum 
der Aphaia (Munich, 1906), where earlier authorities are collected 
and discussed. (E. Gr.) 

History. — (1) Ancient. Aegina, according to Herodotus (v. 83), 
was a colony of Epidaurus, to which state it was originally 
subject. The discovery in the island of a number of gold orna- 
ments belonging to the latest period of Mycenaean art suggests 
the inference that the Mycenaean culture held its own in Aegina 
for some generations after the Dorian conquest of Argos and 
Lacedaemon (see A. J. Evans, in Journal of Hellenic Studies, 
vol. xiii. p. 195). It is probable that the island was not dorized 
before the 9th century B.C. One of the earliest facts known to 
us in its history is its membership in the League of Calauria, 
which included, besides Aegina, Athens, the Minyan (Boeotian) 
Orchomenos, Troezen, Hermione, Nauplia and Prasiae, and was 
probably an organization of states which were still Mycenaean, 
for the suppression of the piracy which had sprung up in the 



Aegean as a result of the decay of the naval supremacy of the 
Mycenaean princes. It follows, therefore, that the maritime 
importance of the island dates back to pre-Dorian times. It is 
usually stated, on the authority of Ephorus, that Pheidon (q.v.) 
of Argos established a mint in Aegina. Though this statement 
is probably to be rejected, it may be regarded as certain that 
Aegina was the first state of European Greece to coin money. 
Thus it was the Aeginetans who, within thirty or forty years of 
the invention of coinage by the Lydians (c. 700 B.C.), introduced 
to the western world a system of such incalculable value to 
trade. The fact that the Aeginetan scale of coins, weights and 
measures was one of the two scales in general use in the Greek 
world is sufficient evidence of the early commercial importance 
of the island. It appears to have belonged to the Eretrian 
league; hence, perhaps, we may explain the war with Samos, 
a leading member of the rival Chalcidian league in the reign of 
King Amphicfates (Herod, iii. 59), i.e. not later than the earlier 
half of the 7th century B.C. In the next century Aegina is one 
of the three principal states trading at the emporium of Nau- 
cratis (q.v.), and it is the only state of European Greece that has 
a share in this factory (Herod, ii. 178). At the beginning of the 
5th century it seems to have been an entrepot of the Pontic 
grain trade, at a later date an Athenian monopoly (Herod, vii. 
147). Unlike the other commercial states of the 7th and 6th 
centuries B.C., e.g. Corinth, Chalcis, Eretria and Miletus, Aegina 
founded no colonies. The settlements to which Strabo refers 
(viii. 376) cannot be regarded as any real exceptions to this 
statement. 

The history of Aegina, as it has come down to us, is almost 
exclusively a history of its relations with the neighbouring state 
of Athens. The history of these relations, as recorded by 
Herodotus (v. 79-89; vi. 49-51, 73, 85-94), involve critical 
problems of some difficulty and interest. He traces back the 
hostility of the two states to a dispute about the images of the 
goddesses Damia and Auxesia, which the Aeginetans had carried 
off from Epidaurus, their parent state. The Epidaurians had 
been accustomed to make annual offerings to the Athenian 
deities Athena and Erechtheus in payment for the Athenian 
olive-wood of which the statues were made. Upon the refusal 
of the Aeginetans to continue these offerings, the Athenians 
endeavoured to carry away the images. Their design was miracu- 
lously frustrated — according to the Aeginetan version, the 
statues fell upon their knees, — and only a single survivor returned 
to Athens, there to fall a victim to the fury of his comrades' 
widows, who pierced him with their brooch-pins. No date is 
assigned by Herodotus for this " old feud "; recent writers, e.g. 
J. B. Bury and R. W. Macan, suggest the period between Solon 
and Peisistratus, c. 570 B.C. It may be questioned, however, 
whether the whole episode is not mythical. A critical analysis 
of the narrative seems to reveal little else than a series of aetio- 
logical traditions, explanatory of cults and customs, e.g. of the 
kneeling posture of the images of Damia and Auxesia, of the use 
of native ware instead of Athenian in their worship, and of the 
change in women's dress at Athens from the Dorian to the 
Ionian style. The account which Herodotus gives of the hostili- 
ties between the two states in the early years of the 5th century 
B.C. is to the following effect. Thebes, after the defeat by 
Athens about 507 B.C., appealed to Aegina for assistance. The 
Aeginetans at first contented themselves with sending the images 
of the Aeacidae, the tutelary heroes of their island. Subse- 
quently, however, they entered into an alliance, and ravaged 
the sea-board of Attica. The Athenians were preparing to make 
reprisals, in spite of the advice of the Delphic oracle that they 
should desist from attacking Aegina for thirty years, and con- 
tent themselves meanwhile with dedicating a precinct to Aeacus, 
when their projects were interrupted by the Spartan intrigues 
for the restoration of Hippias. In 491 B.C. Aegina was one of 
the states which gave the symbols of submission (" earth and 
water ") to Persia. Athens at once appealed to Sparta to 
punish this act of. medism, and Cleomenes I. (q.v.), one of the 
Spartan kings, crossed over to the island, to arrest those who 
were responsible for it. His attempt was at first unsuccessful ; 



AEGINA 



253 





*^ 



Reproduced by permission, from FurCwangh 
Aegina , das Heiligtum der Aphaia 




LOWER TERRACE WALL 



THE SANCTUARY OF APHAEA 






,,f 


Yards 
10 


*9 





5 


Metres 
10 


20 










Emery Walker, 



V.E.R.Fiechter.del. 

but, after the deposition of Demaratus, he visited the island a 
second time, accompanied by his new colleague Leotychides, 
seized ten of the leading citizens and deposited them at Athens 
as hostages. After the death of Cleomenes and the refusal of 
the Athenians to restore the hostages to Leotychides, the 
Aeginetans retaliated by seizing a number of Athenians at a 
festival at Sunium. Thereupon the Athenians concerted a plot 
with Nicodromus, the leader of the democratic party in the 
island, for the betrayal of Aegina. He was to seize the old city, 
and they were to come to his aid on the same day with seventy 
vessels. The plot failed owing to the late arrival of the Athenian 
force, when Nicodromus had already fled the island. An engage- 
ment followed in which the Aeginetans were defeated. Subse- 
quently, however, they succeeded in winning a victory over the 
Athenian fleet. All the incidents subsequent to the appeal of 
Athens to Sparta are expressly referred by Herodotus to the 
interval between the sending of the heralds in 491 B.C. and the 
invasion of Datis and Artaphernes in 400 B.C. (cf. Herod, vi. 40 
with 94) . There are difficulties in this story, of which the follow- 
ing are the principal: — (i.) Herodotus nowhere states or implies 
that peace was concluded between the two states before 481 B.C., 
nor does he distinguish between different wars during this period. 



Hence it would follow that the war lasted from shortly after 507 
B.C. down to the congress at the Isthmus of Corinth in 481 B.C. 
(ii.) It is only for two years (490 and 491) out of the twenty-five 
that any details are given. It is the more remarkable that no 
incidents are recorded in the period between Marathon and 
Salamis, seeing that at the time of the Isthmian Congress the 
war is described as the most important one then being waged 
in Greece (Herod, vii. 145). (iii.) It is improbable that Athens 
would have sent twenty vessels to the aid of the Ionians in 498 
B.C. if at the time she was at war with Aegina. (iv.) There is an 
incidental indication of time, which points to the period after 
Marathon as the true date for the events which are referred by 
Herodotus to the year before Marathon, viz. the thirty years 
that were to elapse between the dedication of the precinct to 
Aeacus and the final victory of Athens (Herod, v. 89). As the 
final victory of Athens over Aegina was in 458 B.C., the thirty 
years of the oracle would carry us back to the year 488 B.C. as 
the date of the dedication of the precinct and the outbreak of 
hostilities. This inference is supported by the date of the 
building of the 200 triremes " for the war against Aegina " on 
the advice of Themistocles, which is given in the Censtiiutien of 
Athens as 483-482 B.C. (Herod, vii. 144; Ath. Pol. 22. 7). It is 



'54 



AEGINETA^AEGISTHUS 



probable, therefore, that Herodotus is in error both in tracing 
back the beginning of hostilities to an alliance between Thebes 
and Aegina (c. 507) and in putting the episode of Nicodromus 
before Marathon. Overtures were unquestionably made by 
Thebes for an alliance with Aegina c. 507 B.C., but they came to 
nothing. The refusal of Aegina was veiled under the diplomatic 
form of " sending the Aeacidae." The real occasion of the out- 
break of the war was the refusal of Athens to restore the hostages 
some twenty years later. There was but one war, and it lasted 
from 488 to 481. That Athens had the worst of it in this war 
is certain. Herodotus had no Athenian victories to record 
after the initial success, and the fact that Themistocles was able 
to carry his proposal to devote the surplus funds of the state to 
the building of so large a fleet seems to imply that the Athenians 
were themselves convinced that a supreme effort was neces- 
sary. It may be noted, in confirmation of this view, that the 
naval supremacy of Aegina is assigned by the ancient writers 
on chronology to precisely this period, i.e. the years 490-480 
(Eusebius, Chron. Can. p. 337). 

In the repulse of Xerxes it is possible that the Aeginetans 
played a larger part than is conceded to them by Herodotus. 
The Athenian tradition, which he follows in the main, would 
naturally seek to obscure their services. , It was to Aegina 
rather than Athens that the prize of valour at Salamis was 
awarded, and the destruction of the Persian fleet appears to 
have been as much the work of the Aeginetan contingent as of 
the Athenian (Herod, viii. 91). There are other inditations, too, 
of the importance of the Aeginetan fleet in the Greek scheme of 
defence. In view of these considerations it becomes difficult to 
credit the number of the vessels that is assigned to them by 
Herodotus (30 as against 180 Athenian vessels, cf. Greek 
History, sect. Authorities). During the next twenty years the 
philo-laconian policy of Cimon {q.v.) secured Aegina, as a member 
of the Spartan league, from attack. The change in Athenian 
foreign pol ; cy, which was consequent upon the ostracism of 
Cimon in 46 1 , led to what is sometimes called the First Pelopon- 
nesian War, in which the brunt of the fighting fell upon Corinth 
and Aegina. The latter state was forced to surrender to Athens 
after a siege, and to accept the position of a subject-ally (c. 456 
B.C.). The tribute was fixed at 30 talents. By the terms of 
the Thirty Years' Truce (445 B.C.) Athens covenanted to restore 
to Aegina her autonomy, but the clause remained a dead 
letter. In the first winter of the Peloponnesian War (431 B.C.) 
Athens expelled the Aeginetans, and established a cleruchy 
in their island. The exiles were settled by Sparta in Thyreatis, 
on the frontiers of Laconia and Argolis. Even in their new 
home they were not safe from Athenian rancour. 1 A force 
landed under Nicias in 424, and put most of them to the 
sword. At the end of the Peloponnesian War Lysander 
restored the scattered remnants of the old inhabitants to the 
island, which was used by the Spartans as a base for opera- 
tions against Athens in the Corinthian War. Its greatness, 
however, was at an end. The part which it plays hence- 
forward is insignificant. 

It would be a mistake to attribute the fall of Aegina solely to 
the development of the Athenian navy. It is probable that the 
power of Aegina had steadily declined during the twenty years 
after Salamis, and that it had declined absolutely, as well as 
relatively, to that of Athens. Commerce was the source of 
Aegina's greatness, and her trade, which appears to have been 
principally with the Levant, must have suffered seriously from 
the war with Persia. Her medism in 491 is to be explained by 
her commercial relations with the Persian Empire. She was 
forced into patriotism in spite of herself, and the glory won at 
Salamis was paid for by the loss of her trade and the decay of 
her marine. The completeness of the ruin of so powerful a 
state — we should look in vain for an analogous case in the history 
of the modern world — finds an explanation in the economic 
conditions of the island, the prosperity of which rested upon 
a basis of slave-labour. It is impossible, indeed, to accept 
Aristotle's (cf. Athenaeus vi. 272) estimate of 470,000 as the 

1 Pericles called Aegina the "eye-sore" fam) of the Peiraeus. 



number of the slave-population; it is clear,' however, that the 
number must have been out of all proportion to that of the 
free inhabitants. In this respect the history of Aegina does 
but anticipate the history of Greece as a whole. 

The constitutional history of Aegina is unusually simple. 
So long as the island retained its independence the government 
was an oligarchy. There is no trace of the heroic monarchy 
and no tradition of a tyrannis. The story of Nicodromus, while 
it proves the existence of a democratic party, suggests, at the 
same time, that it could count upon little support.! 

(2) Modern. — Aegina passed with the rest of Greece under the 
successive dominations of Macedoh, the Aetolians, Attalus of 
Pergamum and Rome. In 1537 the island, then a prosperous 
Venetian colony, was overrun and ruined by the pirate Barba- 
rossa (Khair-ed-Din). One of the last Venetian strongholds in 
the Levant, it was ceded by the treaty of Passarowitz (1718) to 
the Turks. In 1826-1828 the town became for a time the capital 
of Greece and the centre of a large commercial population (about 
10,000), which has dwindled to about 4300. 
i _ Bibliography. — Herodotus loc. cit.; Thucydides i. 105, 108, 
ii. 27, iv. 56, 57. For the criticism of Herodotus's account of the 
relations of Athens and Aegina, Wilamowitz, Aristoteles und A then, 
ii. 280-288, is indispensable. See also Macan, Herodotus iv.-vi., 
ii. 102-120. (E. M. W.) 

AEGINETA, PAULUS, a celebrated surgeon of the island of 
Aegina, whence he derived his name. According to Le Clerc's 
calculation, he lived in the 4th century of the Christian era; 
but Abulfaragius (Barhebraeus) places him with more prob- 
ability in the 7 th. The title of his most important work, as 
given by Suidas, is 'E^ito^s 'Icltpiktjs Bi/3\ta 'Eirrd (Synopsis 
of Medicine in Seven Books), the 6th book of which, treating 
of operative surgery, is of special interest for surgical history. 
The whole work in the original Greek was published at 
Venice in 1528, and another edition appeared at Basel in 1538. 
Several Latin translations have been published, and an 
excellent English version, with commentary, by Dr F. Adams 
.(1844-1848). 

AEGIS (Gr. Aigis), in Homer, the shield or buckler of Zeus, 
fashioned for him by Hephaestus, furnished with tassels and 
bearing the Gorgon's head in the centre. Originally symbolical 
of the storm-cloud, it is probably derived from cucrcra), signifying 
rapid, violent motion. When the god shakes it, Mount Ida is 
wrapped in clouds, the thunder rolls and men are smitten with 
fear. He sometimes lends it to Athene and (rarely) to Apollo. 
In the later story (Hyginus, Poet. Astronom. ii. 13) Zeus is said 
to have used the skin of the goat Amaltheia (aiyis = goat-skin), 
which suckled him in Crete, as a buckler when he went forth to 
do battle against, the giants. Another legend represents the aegis 
as a fire-breathing monster like the Chimaera, which was slain 
by Athene, who afterwards wore its skin as a cuirass (Diodorus 
Siculus iii. 70). It appears to have been really the goat's skin 
used as a belt to support the shield. When so used it would 
generally be fastened on the right shoulder, and would partially 
envelop the chest as it passed obliquely round in front and 
behind to be attached to the shield under the left arm. Hence, 
by transference, it would be employed to denote at times the 
shield which it supported, and at other times a cuirass, the 
purpose of which it in part served. In accordance with this 
double msaning the aegis appears in works of art sometimes as 
an animal's skin thrown over the shoulders and arms, sometimes 
as a cuirass, with a border of snakes corresponding to the tassels 
of Homer, usually with the Gorgon's head in the centre. It is 
often represented on the statues of Roman emperors, heroes 
and warriors, and on cameos and vases. 

See F. G. Welcker, Griechische Gotterlehre (1857); L. Preller, 
Griechische Mylhologie, i. (1887) ; articles in Pauly-Wissowa's Real- 
encyclopadie, Roscher's Lexikon der Mythologie, Daremberg and 
Saglio's Dictionnaire des Antiquites, and Smith's Dictionary of Greek 
and Roman Antiquities (3rd ed., 1890). 

AEGISTHUS, in Greek legend, was the son of Thyestes by his 
own daughter Pelopia. Having been exposed by his mother to 
conceal her shame, he was found by shepherds and suckled by a 
goat — whence his name. His uncle Atreus, who had married 



AEGOSPOTAMI— iELFRIC 



255 



Pelopia, took him to Mycenae, and brought him up as his own 
son. When he grew up Aegisthus slew Atreus, and ruled jointly 
with his father over Mycenae, until they were deposed by 
Agamemnon on his return from exile. After the departure of 
Agamemnon to the Trojan war, Aegisthus seduced his wife 
Clytaemnestra (more correctly Clytaemestra) and with her 
assistance slew him on his return. Eight years later his murder 
was avenged by his son Orestes. 

Homer, Od. iii. 263, iv. 517; Hyginus, Fab. 87. 

AEGOSPOTAMI (i.e. " Goat Streams "), a small creek issuing 
into the Hellespont, N.E. of Sestos, the scene of the decisive 
battle in 405 B.C. by which Lysander destroyed the last Athenian 
armament in the Peloponnesian War (q.v.). The township of 
that name, whose existence is attested by coins of the 5th and 
4th centuries, must have been quite insignificant. 

AXFRIC, called the " Grammarian " (c. 955-1020?), English 
abbot and author, was born about 955. He was educated in the 
Benedictine monastery at Winchester under jEthelwold, who 
was bishop there from 963 to 984. iEthelwold had carried on 
the tradition of Dunstan in his government of the abbey of 
Abingdon, and at Winchester he continued his strenuous efforts. 
He seems to have actually taken part in the work of teaching. 
/Elfric no doubt gained some reputation as a scholar at Win- 
chester, for when, in 987, the abbey of Cernel (Cerne Abbas, 
Dorsetshire) was finished, he was sent by Bishop ^Elfheah 
(Alphege), ^Ethelwold's successor, at the request of the chief 
benefactor of the abbey, the ealdorman iEthelmasr, to teach the 
Benedictine monks there. He was then in priest's orders. 
^Ethelma?r and his father ^Ethelweard were both enlightened 
patrons of learning, and became iEIfric's faithful friends. It 
was at Cernel, and partly at the desire, it appears, of /Ethel- 
weard, that he planned the two series of his English homilies 
(ed. Benjamin Thorpe, 1844-1846, for the yElfric Society), com- 
piled from the Christian fathers, and dedicated to Sigeric, arch- 
bishop of Canterbury (990-994). The Latin preface to the first 
series enumerates some of .-Elf ric's authorities, the chief of whom 
was Gregory the Great, but the short list there given by no means 
exhausts the authors whom he consulted. In the preface to the 
first volume he regrets that except for Alfred's translations 
Englishmen had no means of learning the true doctrine as ex- 
pounded by the Latin fathers. Professor Earle (A.S. Literature, 
1884) thinks he aimed at correcting the apocryphal, and to 
modern ideas superstitious, teaching of the earlier Blickling 
Homilies. The first series of forty homilies is devoted to plain 
and direct exposition of the chief events of the Christian year; 
the second deals more fully with church doctrine and history. 
^Elfric denied the immaculate birth of the Virgin (Homilies, ed. 
Thorpe, ii. 466), and his teaching on the Eucharist in the Canons 
and in the Sermo de sacrificio in die pascae (ibid. ii. 262 seq.) was 
appealed to by the Reformation writers as a proof that the early 
English church did not hold the Roman doctrine of transub- 
stantiation. 1 His Latin Grammar and Glossary 2 were written 
for his pupils after the two books of homilies. A third series of 
homilies, the Lives of the Saints, dates from 996 to 997. Some 
of the sermons in the second series had been written in a kind of 
rhythmical, alliterative prose, and in the Lives of the Saints (ed. 
W. W. Skeat, 1881-1900, for the Early English Text Society) 
the practice is so regular that most of them are arranged as 
verse by Professor Skeat. By the wish of ^Ethelweard he also 
began a paraphrase 3 of parts of the Old Testament, but under 
protest, for the stories related in it were not, he thought, suitable 
for simple minds. There is no certain proof that he remained 
at Cernel. It has been suggested that this part of his life was 

1 See A Testimonie of Antiquitie, shewing the auncienl fayth in the 
Church of England touching the sacrament of the body and bloude of 
the Lord here publikely preached, printed by John Day (1567). It 
was quoted in John Foxe's Actes and Monuments (ed. 1610). 

2 Ed. J. Zupitza in Sammlung englischer Denkmdler (vol. i., Berlin, 
1880). 

3 Edited by Edward Thwaites as Heptateuchus (Oxford, 1698); 
modern edition in Grein's Bibliathek der A . S. Prosa (vol. i. Cassel and 
Gottingen, 1872). See also B. Assmann, AbtJElfric's . . . Esther 
(Halle, 1885), and Abt Mlfric's Judith (in Anglia, vol. x.). 



chiefly spent at Winchester; but his writings for the patrons of 
Cernel, and the fact that he wrote in 998 bis Canons 4 as a pastoral 
letter for Wulfsige, the bishop of Sherborne, the diocese in which 
the abbey was situated, afford presumption of continued resi- 
dence there. He became in 1005 the first abbot of Eynsham 
or Ensham, near Oxford, another foundation of ./Ethelmaer's. 
After his elevation he wrote an abridgment for his monks of 
^Ethelwold's De consuetudine monachorum, h adapted to their 
rudimentary ideas of monastic life; a letter to Wulfgeat of 
Ylmandun 6 ; an introduction to the study of the Old and New 
Testaments (about 1008, edited by William L'Isle in 1623); 
a Latin life of his master ^Ethelwold 7 ; a pastoral letter for 
Wulfstan, archbishop of York and bishop of Worcester, in Latin 
and English; and an English version of Bede's De Temporibus. 3 
The Colloquium, 9 a Latin dialogue designed to serve his 
scholars as a manual of Latin conversation, may date from his 
life at Cernel. It is safe to assume that the original draft of 
this, afterwards enlarged by his pupil, ^Elfric Bata, was by 
^Elfric, and represents what his own scholar days were like. 
The last mention of ^Elfric Abbot, probably the grammarian, 
is in a will dating from about 1020. 

There have been three suppositions about ^Elfric. (1) He was 
identified with ^Elfric (995-1005), archbishop of Canterbury. 
This view was upheld by John Bale (III. Maj. Brit. Scriptorum 
. . . 2nd ed., Basel, 1557-1559; vol. i. p. 149, s.v. Alfric); by 
Humphrey Wanley (Catalogus librorum septentrionalium, &c, 
Oxford, 1705, forming vol. ii. of George Hickes's Antiquae 
literaturae septentrionalis) ; by Elizabeth Els,tob, The English- 
Saxon Homily on the Birthday of St Gregory (1709; new edition, 
1839); and by Edward Rowe Mores, ALlfrico, Dorobernensi, 
archiepiscopo, Commentarius (ed. G. J. Thorkelin, 1789), in 
which the conclusions of earlier writers on ^Elfric are reviewed. 
Mores made him abbot of St Augustine's at Dover, and finally 
archbishop of Canterbury. (2) Sir Henry Spelman, in his Concilia 
. . . (1639, vol. i. p. 583), printed the Canones ad Wulsinum 
episcopum, and suggested ^Elfric Putta or Putto, archbishop of 
York, as the author, adding some note of others bearing the 
name. The identity of yElfric the grammarian with jElfric 
archbishop of York was also discussed by Henry Wharton, 
in Anglia Sacra (1691, vol. i. pp. 125-134), in a dissertation 
reprinted in J. P. Migne's Patrologia (vol. 139, pp. 1459-70, 
Paris, 1853). (3) William of Malmesbury (De gestis pontificum 
anglorum, ed. N. E. S. A. Hamilton, Rolls Series, 1870, p. 406) 
suggested that he was abbot of Malmesbury and bishop of 
Crediton. The main facts of his career were finally elucidated 
by Eduard Dietrich in a series of articles contributed to C. W. 
Niedner's Zeitschrift fur historische Theologie (vols, for 1855 and 
1856, Gotha), which have formed the basis of all subsequent 
writings on the subject. 

Sketches of ^Elfric's career are in B. Ten Brink's Early English 
Literature (to Wiclif) (trans. H. M. Kennedy, New York, 1883, pp. 
105-112), and by J. S. Westlake in The Cambridge History of English 
Literature (vol. i., 1907, pp. 1 16-129). An excellent bibliography 
and account of the critical apparatus is given in Dr R. Wiilker's 
Grundriss zur Geschichte der angelsdchsischen Litteratur (Leipzig, 
1885, pp. 452-480). See also the account by Professor Skeat in Pt. iv. 
pp. 8-61 of his edition of the Lives of the Saints, already cited, which 
gives a full account of the MSS., and a discussion of ^Elfric's sources, 
with further bibliographical references ; and JElfric, a New Study of 
his Life and Writings, by Miss C. L. White (Boston, New York and 
London, 1898) in the " Yale Studies in English." Alcuini Interro- 
gations Sigewulfi Presbyteri in Genesin (ed. G. E. McLean, Halle, 
1883) is attributed to ^Elfric by its editor. There are other isolated 
sermons and treatises by /Elfric, printed in vol. iii. of Grein's Bibl. 
v. A.S. Prosa. 

4 Printed by Benjamin Thorpe in Ancient Laws and Institutes of 
England (1840), with the later pastoral for Wulfstan. 

6 See E. Breck, A Fragment of JElfric; translation of JElhelwold's 
De Consuetudine Monachorum and its relation to other MSS. (Leipzig, 

l8S 7)- . 

6 Ilmington, on the borders of Warwickshire and Gloucestershire. 

7 Included by J. Stevenson in the Chron. Monast. de Abingdon 
(vol. ii. pp. 253-266, Rolls Series, 1858). 

8 See Oswald Cockayne, Leechdonis, Wortcunning and Starcraft 
(vol. iii., 1866, pp. xiv.-xix. and pp. 233 ei seq.) in the Rolls Series. 

9 See an article by J. Zupitza in the Zeitschrift fur deutsches Altertum 
(vol. xix., new series, 1887). 



256 



AELIA CAPITOLINA— AEMILIA VIA 



AELIA CAPITOLINA, the city built by the emperor Hadrian, 
a.d. 131, and occupied by a Roman colony, on the site of Jeru- 
salem (q.v.), which was in ruins when he visited his Syrian 
dominions. Aelia is derived from the emperor's family name, 
and Capitolina from that of Jupiter Capitolinus, to whom a 
temple was built on the site of the Jewish temple. 

AELIAN (Aelianus Tacticus), Greek military writer of 
the 2nd century a.d., resident at Rome. He is sometimes 
confused with Claudius Aelianus, the Roman writer referred to 
below. Aelian's military treatise, TaKTi/07 Gecopia, is dedicated 
to Hadrian, though this is probably a mistake for Trajan, and 
the date a.d. 106 has been assigned to it. It is a handbook of 
Greek, i.e. Macedonian, drill and tactics as practised by the 
Hellenistic successors of Alexander the Great. The author claims 
to have consulted all the best authorities, the chief of which was 
a lost treatise on the subject by Polybius. Perhaps the chief 
value of Aelian's work lies in his critical account of preceding 
works on the art of war, and in the fulness of his technical 
details in matters of drill. Critics of the 18th century — Guichard 
Folard and the prince de Ligne — were unanimous in thinking 
Aelian greatly inferior to Arrian, but both on his immediate 
successors, the Byzantines, and on the Arabs, who translated 
the text for their own use, Aelian exercised a great influence. 
The emperor Leo VI. incorporated much of Aelian's text in 
his own work on, the military art. The Arabic version of Aelian 
was made about 1350. In spite of its academic nature, the 
copious details to be found in the treatise rendered it of the 
highest value to the army organizers of the 16th century, who 
were engaged in fashioning a regular military system out of the 
semi-feudal systems of previous generations. The Macedonian 
phalanx of Aelian had many points of resemblance to the solid 
masses of pikemen and the " squadrons " of cavalry of the 
Spanish and Dutch systems, and the translations made in the 
16th century formed the groundwork of numerous books on drill 
and tactics. Moreover, his works, with those of Xenophon, 
Polybius, Aeneas and Arrian, were minutely studied by every 
soldier of the 16th and 17th centuries who wished to be master 
of his profession. It has been suggested that Aelian was the 
real author of most of Arrian's Tactica, and that the T(wt/o) 
Geoipta is a later revision of this original, but the theory is not 
generally accepted. 

The first edition of the Greek text is that of Robortelli (Venice, 
I 55 2 ) ! the Elzevir text (Leiden, 1613) has notes. The text in 
W. Rustow and H. Kochly's Griechische Kriegsschriftsteller (1855) is 
accompanied by a translation, notes and reproductions of the original 
illustrations. A Latin translation by Theodore Gaza of Thessalonica 
was included in the famous collection Veteres de re militari scriptores 
(Rome and Venice, 1487, Cologne, 1528, &c). The French transla- 
tion of Machault, included in his Milices des Grecs et Romains (Paris, 
16 15) and entitled De la Sergenterie des Grecs, a German translation 
Lom Theodore Gaza (Cologne, 1524), and the English version of Jo. 
B(ingham), which includes a drill manual of the English troops in 
the Dutch service, Tacticks of Aelian (London, 1616), are of import- 
ance in the military literature of the period. A later French transla- 
tion by Bouchard de Bussy, La Milice des Grecs ou Tactique d'£lien 
(Paris, 1737 and 1757); Baumgartner's German translation in his 
incomplete Sammlung aller Kriegsschriftsteller der Griechen (Mann- 
heim and Frankenthal, 1779), reproduced in 1786 as Von Schlachtord- 
nungen, and Viscount Dillon's English version (London, 1814) may 
also be mentioned. See also R. Forster, Studien zu den griechischen 
Taktikern {Hermes, xii., 1877, pp. 444-449); F. Wustenfeld, Das 
Heerwesen der Muhammedaner und die arabische Uebersetsung 
der Taktik des Aelianus (Gottingen, 1880); M. Jahns, Gesch. der 
Kriegswissenschaften, i. 95-97 (Munich, 1889); Rustow and Kochly, 
Gesch. des griechischen Kriegswesens (1852); A. de Lort-Serignan, 
La Phalange (1880); P. Serre, Htudes sur I'hisioire militaire et mari- 
time des Grecs et des Romains (1887); K. K. Miiller, in Pauly- 
Wissowa, Realencyclopddie (Stuttgart, 1894). 

AELIAN (Claudius Aelianus), Roman author and teacher 
of rhetoric, born at Praeneste, flourished under Septimius 
Severus and probably outlived Elagabalus (d. 222). He 
spoke Greek so perfectly that he was called " honey-tongued " 
{neXlyXuaaos) ; although a Roman he preferred Greek authors, 
and wrote in Greek himself. His chief works are: On the Nature 
of Animals, curious and interesting stories of animal life, fre- 
quently used to convey moral lessons (ed. Schneider, 1784; 
Jacobs, 1832); Various History — for the most part preserved 



only in an abridged form — consisting mainly of anecdotes of 
men and customs (ed. Lunemann, 1811). Both works are valu- 
able for the numerous excerpts from older writers. Considerable 
fragments of two other works On Providence and Divine Mani- 
festations are preserved in Suidas; .twenty Peasants' Letters, 
after the manner of Alciphron but inferior, are also attributed 
to him. 

Editio princeps of complete works by Gesner, 1556; Hercher, 1864- 
1866. English translation of the Various History only by Fleming, 
1576, and Stanley, 1665; of the Letters by Quillard (French), 1895. 

JELRED, Ailred, Ethelred (1109-1166), English theo- 
logian, historical writer and abbot of Rievaulx, was born at 
Hexham about the year 1109. In his youth he was at the court 
of Scotland as an attendant of Henry, son of David I. He was 
in high favour with that sovereign, but renounced the prospect 
of a bishopric to enter the Cistercian house of Rievaulx in 
Yorkshire, which was founded in 1131 by Walter Espec. Here 
^Elred remained for some time as master of the novices, but 
between the years 1142 and 1146 was elected abbot of Revesby 
in Lincolnshire and migrated thither. In 1146 he became abbot 
of Rievaulx. He led a life of the severest asceticism, and was 
credited with the power of working miracles; owing to his 
reputation the numbers of Rievaulx were greatly increased. 
In 1 1 64 he went as a missionary to the Picts of Galloway. He 
found their religion at a low ebb, the regular clergy apathetic 
and sensual, the bishop little obeyed, the laity divided by the 
family feuds of their rulers, unchaste and ignorant. He induced 
a Galwegian chief to take the habit of religion, and restored 
the peace of the country. Two years later he died of a decline, 
at Rievaulx, in the fifty-seventh year of his age. In the year 
1 191 he was canonized. His writings are voluminous and have 
never been completely published. Amongst them are homilies 
"on the burden of Babylon in Isaiah "; three books "on 
spiritual friendship "; a life of Edward the Confessor; an 
account of miracles wrought at Hexham, and the tract called 
Relalio de Standardo. This last is an account of the Battle of 
the Standard (1138), better known than the similar account by 
Richard of Hexham, but less trustworthy, and in places obscured 
by a peculiarly turgid rhetoric. 

See the Vita Alredi in John of Tynemouth's Nova Legenda Anglie 
(ed. C. Horstmann, 1901, vol. i. p. 41), whence it was taken by 
Capgrave. From Capgrave the work passed into the Bollandist 
Acta Sanctorum (Jan. ii. p. 30). This life is anonymous, but of an 
early date. The most complete printed collection of jElred's works 
is in Migne's Patrologia Latina, vol. exev. ; but this does not include 
the Miracula Hagulstaldensis Ecclesiae which are printed in J. Raine's 
Priory of Hexham, vol. i.(Surtees Society, 1864). A complete list of 
works attributed to ^Elred is given in T. Tanner's Bibliotheca Britan- 
nico-Hibernica (1748), pp. 247-248. The Relalio de Standardo has been 
critically edited by R. Howlett in Chronicles, &c, of Stephen, Henry 
II. and Richard I., vol. iii. (Rolls Series, 1886). (H. W. C. D.) 

AEMILIA VIA, or Aemilian Way. (i) A highroad of Italy, 
constructed in 187 B.C. by the consul M. Aemilius Lepidus, from 
whom it takes its name; it ran from Ariminum to Placentia, a 
distance of 176 m. almost straight N.W., with the plain of the 
Po (Padus) and its tributaries on the right, and the Apennines 
on the left. The 79th milestone from Ariminum found in the 
bed of the Rhenus at Bononia records the restoration of the 
road by Augustus from Ariminum to the river Trebia in 2 B.C. 
(Notiz. Scav., 1902, 539). The bridge by which it crossed the 
Sillaro was restored by Trajan in a.d. 100 (Notizie degli Scavi, 
1888, 621). The modern highroad follows the ancient line, and 
some of the original bridges still exist. After Augustus, the road 
gave its name to the district which formed the eighth region of 
Italy (previously known as Gallia or Provincia Ariminum), at 
first in popular usage (as in Martial), but in official language as 
early as the 2nd century; it is still in use (see Emilia). The 
district was bounded on the N. by the Padus, E. by the Adriatic, 
S. by the river Crustumium (mod. Conca), and W. by the Apen- 
nines and the Ira (mod. Staff ora) at Iria (mod. Voghera), and 
corresponds approximately with the modern district. «# 

(2) A road constructed in 109 B.C. by the censor M. Aemilius 
Scaurus from Vada Volaterrana and Luna to Vada Sabatia and 
thence over the Apennines to Dertona (Tortona), where it joined 



AEMILIUS— AENESIDEMUS 



257 



the Vra Postumia from Genua to Cremona. We must, however 
(as Mommsen points out in C.I.L. v. p. 885), suppose that the 
portion of the coast road from Vada Volaterrana to Genua at 
least must have existed before the construction of the Via 
Postumia in 148 B.C. Indeed Polybius (iii. 39. 8) tells us (and 
this must refer to the time of the Gracchi if not earlier) that the 
Romans had in his time built the coast road from the Rhone to 
Carthago Nova; and it is incredible that the coast road in Italy 
itself should not have been constructed previously. It is, how- 
ever, a very different thing to open a road for traffic, and so to 
construct it that it takes its name from that construction in 
perpetuity. (T. As.) 

AEMILIUS, PAULUS (Paolo Emilio ) (d. 1529), Italian his- 
torian, was born at Verona. He obtained such reputation in his 
own country that he was invited to France in the reign of 
Charles VIII., in order to write in Latin the history of the kings 
of France, and was presented to a canonry in Notre Dame. He 
enjoyed the patronage and support of Louis XII. He died at 
Paris on the 5th of May 1529. His De Rebus gestis Francorum 
was translated into French in 1581, and has also been translated 
into Italian and German. 

AENEAS, the famous Trojan hero, son of Anchises and 
Aphrodite, one of the most important figures in Greek and 
Roman legendary history. In Homer, he is represented as the 
chief bulwark of the Trojans next to Hector, and the favourite 
of the gods, who frequently interpose to save him from danger 
(Iliad, v. 311). The legend that he remained in the country 
after the fall of Troy, and founded a new kingdom (Iliad, xx. 
308; Hymn to Aphrodite, 196) is now generally considered to be 
of comparatively late origin. The story of his emigration is 
post-Homeric, and set forth in its fullest development by Virgil 
in the Aeneid. Carrying his aged father and household gods on 
his back and leading his little son Ascanius by the hand, he makes 
his way to the coast, his wife Creusa being lost during the con- 
fusion of the flight. After a perilous voyage to Thrace, Delos, 
Crete and Sicily (where his father dies), he is cast up by a storm, 
sent by Juno, on the African coast. Refusing to remain with 
Dido, queen of Carthage, who in despair puts an end to her life, 
he sets sail from Africa, and after seven years' wandering lands 
at the mouth of the Tiber. He is hospitably received by Latinus, 
king of Latium, is betrothed to his daughter Lavinia, and founds 
a city called after her, Lavinium. Turnus, king of Rutuli, a 
rejected suitor, takes up arms against him and Latinus, but is 
defeated and slain by Aeneas on the river Numicius. The story 
of the Aeneid ends with the death of Turnus. According to 
Livy (i. 1. 2), Aeneas, after reigning a few years over Latium, 
is slain by the Rutuli; after the battle, his body cannot be found, 
and he is supposed to have been carried up to heaven. He 
receives divine honours, and is worshipped under the name of 
Jupiter Indiges (Dionysius Halic. i. 64). 

See J. A. Hild, La Legende d'linle avant Vergile (1883) ; F. Cauer, 
De Fabulis Graecis ad Romam conditam pertinentibus ( 1 884) and Die 
Romische Aeneassage,von Naevius bis Vergilius (1886) ; G. Boissier, 
"La Legende d'Enee " in Revue des Deux Mondes, Sept. 1883; 
A. Forstemann, Zur Geschichte des Aeneasmythus (1894) ; articles 
in Pauly-Wissowa's Realencyclopddie (new ed., 1894); Roscher's 
Lexicon der Mythologie; Daremberg and Saglio's Dictionnaire des 
antiquites; Preller's Grieckische und romische Mythologie; and 
especially Schwegler, Romische Geschichte (1867). 

Romances. — The story of Aeneas, as a sequel to the legend of 
Troy, formed the subject of several epic romances in the middle 
ages. The Roman d'&neas (c. 1160, or later), of uncertain 
authorship (attributed by some to Benoit de Sainte-More), the 
first French poem directly imitated from the Aeneid, is a fairly 
close adaptation of the original. The trouvere, however, omits 
the greater part of the wanderings of Aeneas, and adorns his 
narrative with gorgeous descriptions, with accounts of the mar- 
vellous properties of beasts and stones, and of single combats 
among the knights who figure in the story. He also elaborates 
the episodes most attractive to his audience, notably those of 
Dido and Aeneas and Lavinia, the last of whom plays a far 
more important part than in the Aeneid. Where possible, he 
substitutes human for divine intervention, and ignores the idea 



of the glorification of Rome and Augustus, which dominates 
the Virgilian epic. On this work were founded the Eneide or 
Eneit (between n 80 and n 90) of Heinrich von Veldeke, written 
in Flemish and now only extant in a version in the Thuringian 
dialect, and the Eneydos, written by William Caxton in 1490. 

See B\neas, ed. J. Salverda de Grave (Halle, 1891); see also A. 
Peij, Essai sur li romans d' Eneas (Paris, 1856) ; A. Duval in Hist, 
litteraire de la France, xix. ; Veldeke's Eneide, ed. Ettmiiller (Leipzig, 
1852) and O. Behaghel (Heilbronn, 1882); Eneydos, ed. F. J. Furni- 
vall (1890). For Italian versions see E. G. Parodi in Sludi di 
filologia romanza (v. 1887). 

AENEAS TACTICUS (4th century B.C.), one of the earliest 
Greek writers on the art of war. According to Aelianus Tacticus 
and Polybius, he wrote a number of treatises ('T7ro/wi7/xaTa) 
on the subject; the only one extant deals with the best methods 
of defending a fortified city. An epitome of the whole was made 
by Cineas, minister of Pyrrhus, king of Epirus. The work is 
chiefly valuable as containing a large number of historical illus- 
trations. Aeneas was considered by Casaubon to have been a 
contemporary of Xenophon and identical with the Arcadian 
general Aeneas of Stymphalus, whom Xenophon (Hellenica, 
vii. 3) mentions as fighting at the battle of Mantinea (362 B.C.). 

Editions in I. Casaubon's (1619), Gronovius' (1670) and Ernesti's 
(1763) editions of Polybius; also separately, with notes, by J. C. 
Orelli (Leipzig, 18 18). Other texts are those of W. Riistow and 
H. Kochly (Grieckische Kriegsschriflsteller, vol. i. Leipzig, 1853) and 
A. Hug, Prolegomena Critica ad Aeneae . . . editionem (Zurich. 
University, 1874). See also Count Beausobre, Commentaires sur 
la defense des places d' Aeneas (Amsterdam, 1757); A. Hug, Aeneas 
von Stymphalos (Zurich, 1877) ; C. C. Lange, De Aeneae commentario 
poliorcelico (Berlin, 1879); M. H. Meyer, Observationes in Aeneam 
Tacticum (Halle, 1835) ; Haase, in Johns Jahrbuch, 1835, xiv. 1 ; 
Max Jahns, Gesch. der Kriegswissenschaflen, i. pp. 26-28 (Munich, 
1889); Ad. Bauer, in Zeitschrift fur allg. Geschichte, &c, 1886, i.; 
T. H. Williams in American Journal of Philology, xxv. 4; E. 
Schwartz in Pauly-Wissowa, Realencyclopddie (Stuttgart, 1894). 

AENESIDEMUS, Greek philosopher, was born at Cnossus in 
Crete and taught at Alexandria, probably during the first 
century B.C. He was the leader of what is sometimes known as 
the third sceptical school and revived to a great extent the 
doctrine of Pyrrho and Timon. His chief work was the Pyr- 
rhonian Principles addressed to Lucius Tubero. His philosophy 
consisted of four main parts, the reasons for scepticism and 
doubt, the attack on causality and truth, a physical theory and 
a theory of morality. Of these the two former are important. 
The reasons for doubt are given in the form of the ten " tropes ": 

(1) different animals manifest different modes of perception; 

(2) similar differences are seen among individual men; (3) even 
for the same man, sense-given data are self-contradictory, 
(4) vary from time to time with physical changes, and (5) accord- 
ing to local relations; (6) and (7) objects are known only in- 
directly through the medium of air, moisture, &c, and are in a 
condition of perpetual change in colour, temperature, size and 
motion; (8) all perceptions are relative and interact one upon 
another; (9) our impressions become less deep by repetition 
and custom; and (10) all men are brought up with different 
beliefs, under different laws and social conditions. Truth varies 
infinitely under circumstances whose relative weight cannot be 
accurately gauged. There is, therefore, no absolute knowledge, 
for every man has different perceptions, and, further, arranges 
and groups his data in methods peculiar to himself; so that the 
sum total is a quantity with a purely subjective validity. The 
second part of his work consists in the attack upon the theory 
of causality, in which he adduces almost entirely those considera- 
tions which are the basis of modern scepticism. Cause has no 
existence apart from,the mind which perceives; its validity is 
ideal, or, as Kant would have said, subjective. The relation 
between cause and effect is unthinkable. If the two things 
are different, they are either simultaneous or in succession. If 
simultaneous, cause is effect and effect cause. If not, since 
effect cannot precede cause, cause must precede effect, and there 
must be an instant when cause is not effective, that is, is not 
itself. By these and similar arguments he arrives at the funda- 
mental principle of Scepticism, the radical and universal opposi- 
tion of causes; Tram XSyi^ \6yos d»rwceiTcu. Having reached 



1-9 



2 5 8 



AEOLIAN HARP— AEQUI 



this conclusion, he was able to assimilate the physical theory 
of Heraclitus, as is explained in the Hypotyposes of Sextus 
Empiricus. For admitting that contraries co-exist for the 
perceiving subject, he was able to assert the co-existence of 
contrary qualities in the same object. Having thus disposed 
of the ideas of truth and causality, he proceeds to undermine 
the ethical criterion, and denies that any man can aim at Good, 
Pleasure or Happiness as an absolute, concrete ideal. All 
actions are product of pleasure and pain, good and evil. The 
end of ethical endeavour is the conclusion that all endeavour 
is vain and illogical. The main tendency of this destructive 
scepticism is essentially the same from its first crystallization 
by Aenesidemus down to the most advanced sceptics of to-day 
(see Scepticism). For the immediate successors of Aenesidemus 
see Ageippa, Sextus Empiricus. See also Carneades and 
Arcesilaus. Of the Ilvppcovaoi. Xoyoi nothing remains; we 
have, however, an analysis in the Myriobiblion of Photius. 

See Zeller's History of Greek Philosophy; E. Saisset, JEnesid&me, 
Pascal, Kant; Ritter and Preller, §§ 364-370. 

AEOLIAN HARP (Fr. harpe Solienne; Ger. Aolsharfe, 
Windharje; Ital. or pa d' Eolo), a stringed musical instrument, 
whose name is derived from Aeolus, god of the wind. The 
aeolian harp consists of a sound-box about 3 ft. long, 5 in. 
wide, and 3 in. deep, made of thin deal, or preferably of pine, 
and having beech ends to hold the tuning-pins and hitch-pins. 
A dozen or less catgut strings of different thickness, but 
tuned in exact unison, and left rather slack, are attached to 
the pins, and stretched over two narrow bridges of hard wood, 
one at each end of the sound-board, which is generally pro- 
vided with two rose sound-holes. To ensure a proper passage 
for the wind, another pine board is placed over the strings, 
resting on pegs at the ends of the sound-board, or on a con- 
tinuation of the ends raised from 1 to 3 in. above the strings. 
Kaufmann of Dresden and Heinrich Christoph Koch, who im- 
proved the aeolian harp, introduced this contrivance, which was 
called by them Windfang and Windflilgel; the upper board was 
prolonged beyond the sound-box in the shape of a funnel, in 
order to direct the current of air on to the strings. The aeolian 
harp is placed across a window so that the wind blows obliquely 
across the strings, causing them to vibrate in aliquot parts, i.e. 
(the fundamental note not being heard) the half or octave, the 
third or interval of the twelfth, the second octave, and the 
third above it, in fact the upper partials of the strings in regular 
succession. With the increased pressure of the wind, the dis- 
sonances of the nth and 13th overtones are heard in shrill dis- 
cords, only to give place to beautiful harmonies as the force of 
the wind abates. The principle of the natural vibration of 
strings by the pressure of the wind was recognized in ancient 
times; King David, we hear from the Rabbinic records, used to 
hang his kinnor (kithara) over his bed at night, when it sounded 
in the midnight breeze. The same is related of St Dunstan of 
Canterbury, who was in consequence charged with sorcery. The 
Chinese at the present day fly kites of various sizes, having 
strings stretched across apertures in the paper, which produces 
the effect of an aerial chorus. 

See Athanasius Kircher, Musurgia Universalis, where the aeolian 
harp is first described (1 602-1 608), p. 148; Mathew Young, Bishop 
of Clonfert, Enquiry into the Principal Phenomena of Sounds anal 
Musical Strings, pp. 170-182 (London, 1784); Gottingen Pocket 
Calendar (1792); Mendel's Musikalisches Conversations-Lexikon, 
article " Aeolsharfe." An illustration is given in Rees' Encyclo- 
pedia, plates, vol. ii. Misc. pi. xxv. (K. S.) 

AEOLIS (Aeolia), an ancient district of Asia Minor, colonized 
at a very early date by Aeolian Greeks. The name was applied 
to the coast from the river Hermus to the promontory of Lectum, 
i.e. between Ionia to S. and Troas to N. The Aeolians founded 
twelve cities on the mainland, including Cyme, and numerous 
towns in Mytilene: they were said also to have settled in the 
Troad and even within the Hellespont. 

AEOLUS, in Greek mythology, according to Homer the son of 
Hippotes, god and father of the winds, and ruler of the island of 
Aeolia. In the Odyssey (x. 1) he entertains Odysseus, gives him 
a favourable wind to help him on his journey, and a bag in which 



the unfavourable winds have been confined. Out of curiosity, 
or with the idea that it contains valuable treasures, Odysseus' 
companions open the bag; the winds escape and drive them 
back to the island, whence Aeolus dismisses them with bitter 
reproaches. According to Virgil, Aeolus dwells on one of the 
Aeolian islands to the north of Sicily, Lipara or Strongyle 
(Stromboli), where he keeps the winds imprisoned in a vast 
cavern (Virgil, Aen. i. 52). Another genealogy makes him the 
son of Poseidon and Ame, granddaughter of Hippotes, and a 
descendant of Aeolus, king of Magnesia in Thessaly, the mythical 
ancestor of the tribe of the Aeolians (Diodorus iv. 67). 

AEON, a term often used in Greek (aLcw) to denote an indefinite 
or infinite duration of time; and hence, by metonymy, a being 
that exists for ever. In the latter sense it was chiefly used by 
the Gnostic sects to denote those eternal beings or manifestations 
which emanated from the one incomprehensible and ineffable 
God. (See Gnosticism.) 

AEPINUS, FRANZ ULRICH THEODOR (1724-1802), German 
natural philosopher, was born at Rostock in Saxony on the 
13th of December 1724. He was descended from John Aepinus 
(1499-1553), the first to adopt the Greek form (aiiravos) of the 
family name Hugk or Huck, and a leading theologian and con- 
troversialist at the time of the Reformation. After studying 
medicine for a time, Franz Aepinus devoted himself to the 
physical and mathematical sciences, in which he soon gained 
such distinction that he was admitted a member of the Berlin 
academy of sciences. In 1757 he settled in St Petersburg as 
member of the imperial academy of sciences and professor of 
physics, and remained there till his retirement in 1798. The rest 
of his life was spent at Dorpat, where he died on the 10th of August 
1802. He enjoyed the special favour of the empress Catherine II., 
who appointed him tutor to her son Paul, and endeavoured, 
without success, to establish normal schools throughout the 
empire under his direction. Aepinus is best known by his re- 
searches, theoretical and experimental, in electricity and mag- 
netism, and his principal work, Tentamen Theoriae Electricitatis 
et Magnetismi, published at St Petersburg in 1759, was the first 
systematic and successful attempt to apply mathematical reason- 
ing to these subjects. He also published a treatise, in 1761, De 
distributions caloris per tellurem, and he was the author of memoirs 
on different subjects in astronomy, mechanics, optics and pure 
mathematics, contained in the journals of the learned societies 
of St Petersburg and Berlin. His discussion of the effects of 
parallax in the transit of a planet over the sun's disc excited 
great interest, having appeared (in 1764) between the dates of 
the two transits of Venus that took place in the 18th century. 

AEQUI, an ancient people of Italy, whose name occurs con- 
stantly in Livy's first decade as hostile to Rome in the first three 
centuries of the city's existence. They occupied the upper 
reaches of the valleys of the Anio, Tolenus and Himella; the 
last two being mountain streams running northward ' to join 
the Nar. Their chief centre is said to have been taken by the 
Romans about 484 B.C. (Diodorus xi. 40) and again about ninety 
years later (id. xiv. 106), but they were not finally subdued 
till the end of the second Samnite war (Livy ix. 45, fx. 1; 
Diod. xx. 101), when they seem to have received a limited form 
of franchise (Cic. Off. i. n, 35). All we know of their subsequent 
political condition is that after the Social war the folk of Cliternia 
and Nersae appear united in a res publico Aequiculorum, which 
was a municipium of the ordinary type (C.I.L. ix. p. 388). The 
Latin colonies of Alba Fucens (304 B.C.) and Carsioli (298 B.C.) 
must have spread the use of Latin (or what passed as such) all 
over the district; through it lay the chief (and for some time 
the only) route (Via Valeria) to Luceria and the south. 

Of the language spoken by the Aequi before the Roman con- 
quest we have no record; but since the Marsi (q.v.), who lived 
farther east, spoke in the 3rd century B.C. a dialect closely akin 
to Latin, and since the Hernici (q.v.), their neighbours to the 
south-west, did the same, we have no ground for separating 
any of these tribes from the Latian group (see Latini). If we 
could be certain of the origin of the q in their name and of the 
relation between its shorter and its longer form (note that the i 



AERARII— AERATED WATERS 



259 



in Aequiculus is long — Virgil, Aen. vii. 744 — which seems to con- 
nect it with the locative of aequum " a plain," so that it would 
mean "dwellers in the plain"; but in the historical period 
they certainly lived mainly in the hills) , we should know whether 
they were to be grouped with the q or the p dialects, that is to 
say, with Latin on the one hand, which preserved an original q, 
or with the dialect of Velitrae, commonly called Volscian (and, 
the Volsci were the constant allies of the Aequi), on the other 
hand, in which, as in the Iguvine and Samnite dialects, an original 
q is changed into p. There is no decisive evidence to show 
whether the q in Latin aequus represents an Indo-European q 
as in Latin quis, Umbro-Volsc. pis, or an Indo-European J + xas 
in equns, Umb. ekvo-. The derivative adjective Aequicus might 
be taken to range them with the Volsci rather than the Sabini, 
but it is not clear that this adjective was ever used as a real 
ethnicon; the name of the tribe is always Aequi, or Aequicoli. 
At the end of the Republican period the Aequi appear, under 
the name Aequiculi or Aequicoli, organized as a municipium, 
the territory of which seems to have comprised the upper part 
of the valley of the Salto, still known as Cicolano. It is probable, 
however, that they continued to live in their villages as before. 
Of these Nersae (mod. Nesc'e) was the most considerable. The 
polygonal terrace walls, which exist in considerable numbers in 
the district, are shortly described in Rbmische Mitteilungen 
(1903), 147 seq., but require further study. 

See further thfe articles Marsi, Volsci, Latini, and the refer- 
ences there given; the place-names and other scanty records of 
the dialect are collected by R. S. Conway, The Italic Dialects, 
pp. 300 ff. (R. S. C.) 

AERARII (from Lat. aes, in its subsidiary sense of "poll- 
tax"), originally a class of Roman citizens not included in 
the thirty tribes of Servius Tullius, and subject to a poll-tax 
arbitrarily fixed by the censor. They were (1) the inhabitants of 
conquered towns which had been deprived of local self-govern- 
ment, who possessed the jus conubii and jus commercii, but no 
political rights; Caere is said to have been the first example of 
this (353 B.C.); hence the expression "in tabulas Caeritum 
referre " came to mean " to degrade to the status of an aerarius ": 
(2) full citizens subjected to civil degradation (infamia) as the 
result of following certain professions (e.g. acting), of dishonour- 
able acts in private life [e.g. bigamy) or of conviction for certain 
crimes; (3) persons branded by the censor. Those who were 
thus excluded from the tribes and centuries had no vote, were in- 
capable of filling Roman magistracies and could not serve in the 
army. According to Mommsen, the aerarii were originally the 
non-assidui (non-holders of land), excluded from the tribes, the 
comitia and the army. By a reform of the censor Appius 
Claudius in 312 b.c. these non-assidui were admitted into the 
tribes, and the aerarii as such disappeared. But in 304, Fabius 
Rullianus limited them to the four city tribes, and from that 
time the term meant a man degraded from a higher (country) 
to a lower (city) tribe, but not deprived of the right of voting 
or of serving in the army. The expressions " tribu movere " 
and " aerarium facere," regarded by Mommsen as identical in 
meaning (" to degrade from a higher tribe to a lower "), are 
explained by A. H. J. Greenidge — the first as relegation from a 
higher to a lower tribe or total exclusion from the tribes, the 
second as exclusion from the centuries. Other views of the 
original aerarii are that they were: — artisans and freedmen 
(Niebuhr) ; inhabitants of towns united with Rome by a hos- 
pilium publicum, who had become domiciled on Roman terri- 
tory (Lange) ; only a class of degraded citizens, including neither 
the cives sine sujfragio nor the artisans (Madvig) ; identical with 
the capite censi of the Servian constitution (Belot, Greenidge), 

See A. H. J. Greenidge, Infamia in Roman Law (1894), where 
Mommsen's theory is criticized; E. Belot, Histoire Aes chevaliers 
remains, i. p. 200 (Paris, 1866); L. Pardon, De Aerariis (Berlin, 
1853); P. Willems, Le Droit public romain (1883); A. S., Wilkins 
in Smith's Did. of Greek and Roman Antiquities (3rd ed., 1891) ; and 
the usual handbooks of antiquities. 

AERARIUM (from Lat. aes, in its derived sense of " money "), 
the name (in full, aerarium stabulum, treasure-house) given in 
ancient Rome to the public treasury, and in a secondary sense 



to the public finances. The treasury contained the moneys and 
accounts of the state, and also the standards of the legions; 
the public laws engraved on brass, the decrees of the senate 
and other papers and registers of importance. These public 
treasures were deposited in the temple of Saturn, on the eastern 
slope of the Capitoline hill, and, during the republic, were in 
charge of the urban quaestors (see Quaestor), under the super- 
intendence and control of the senate. This arrangement con- 
tinued (except for the year 4s B.C., when no quaestors were 
chosen) until 28 B.C., when Augustus transferred the aerarium 
to two praefecti aerarii, chosen annually by the senate from 
ex-praetors; in 23 these were replaced by two praetors (praetores 
aerarii or ad aerarium), selected by lot during their term of 
office; Claudius in a.d. 44 restored the quaestors, but nominated 
by the emperor for three years, for whom Nero in 56 substituted 
two ex-praetors, under the same conditions. In addition to the 
common treasury, supported by the general taxes and charged 
with the ordinary expenditure, there was a special reserve fund, 
also in the temple of Saturn, the aerarium* sanctum (or sanctius), 
probably originally consisting of the spoils of war, afterwards 
maintained chiefly by a 5% tax on the value of all manu- 
mitted slaves, this source of revenue being established by a 
lex Manlia in 357. This fund was not to be touched except in 
cases of extreme necessity (Livy vii. 16, xxvii. 10). Under the 
emperors the senate continued to have at least the nominal 
management of the aerarium, while the emperor had a separate 
exchequer, called jiscus. But after a time, as the power of the 
emperors increased and their jurisdiction extended till the senate 
existed only in form and name, this distinction virtually ceased. 
Besides creating the jiscus, Augustus also established in a.d. 6 
a military treasury (aerarium militare), containing all moneys 
raised for and appropriated to the maintenance of the army, 
including a pension fund for disabled soldiers. It was largely 
endowed by the emperor himself (see Monumentum Ancyranum, 
iii. 35) and supported by the proceeds of the tax on public sales 
and the succession duty. Its administration was in the hands 
of three praefecti aerarii militaris, at first appointed by lot, but 
afterwards by the emperor, from senators of praetorian rank, 
for three years. The later emperors had a separate aerarium 
privatum, containing the moneys allotted for their own use, 
distinct from the jiscus, which they administered in the interests 
of the empire. 

The tribuni aerarii have been the subject of much discussion. 
They are supposed by some to be identical with the curatores 
tribuum, and to have been the officials who, under the Servian 
organization, levied the war-tax (tribulum) in the tribes and the 
poll-tax on the aerarii (q.v.). They also acted as paymasters of 
the equites and of the soldiers on service in each tribe. By the 
lex Amelia (70 B.C.) the list of judices was composed, in addition 
to senators and equites, of tribuni aerarii. Whether these were 
the successors of the above, or a new order closely connected 
with the equites, or even the same as the latter, is uncertain. 
According to Mommsen, they were persons who possessed the 
equestrian census, but no public horse. They were removed 
from the list of judices by Caesar, but replaced by Augustus. 
According to Madvig, the original tribuni aerarii were not officials 
at all, but private individuals of considerable means, quite 
distinct from the curatores tribuum, who undertook certain 
financial work connected with their own tribes. Then, as in 
the case of the equites, the term was subsequently extended 
to include all those who possessed the property qualification 
that would have entitled them to serve as tribuni aerarii. 

See Tacitus, Annals, xiii. 29, with Furneaux's notes; O. Hirsch- 
feld, " Das Aerarium militare in der romischen Kaiserzeit," in 
Fleckeisen's Jahrbuch, vol. xcvii. (1868); S. Herrlich, De Aerario et 
FisCo Romanorum (Berlin, 1872); and the usual handbooks and 
dictionaries of antiquities. On the tribuni aerarii see E. Belot, Hist, 
des chevaliers romains, ii. p. 276; J. N. Madvig, Opuscula Academica, 
ii. p. 242; J. B. Mispoulet, Les Institutions poliliques des Romains 
(1883), ii. p. 208; Mommsen, Romisches Staalsrecht, iii. p. 189; 
A. S. Wilkins in Smith s Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities 
(3rd ed., 1890). 

AERATED WATERS. Waters charged with a larger pro- 
portion of carbon dioxide than they will dissolve at ordinary 



260 



AERONAUTICS 



atmospheric pressure occur in springs in various parts of the 
world (see Mineral Waters) . Such waters, which also generally 
hold in solution a considerable percentage of saline constituents, 
early acquired a reputation as medicinal agents, and when carbon 
dioxide (" fixed air ") became familiar to chemists the possibility 
was recognized, as by Joseph Priestley {Directions for impregnat- 
ing water with fixed air . . . to communicate the peculiar Spirit 
and Virtues of Pyrmont water, 17 7 2), of imitating them artificially. 
Many of the ordinary aerated waters of commerce, however, do 
not pretend to reproduce any known natural water; they are 
merely beverages owing their popularity to their effervescing 
properties and the flavour imparted by a small quantity of some 
salt such as sodium bicarbonate or a little fruit syrup. Their 
manufacture on a considerable scale was begun at Geneva so 
far back as 1790 by Nicholas Paul, and the excellence of the 
soda water prepared in London by J. Schweppe, who had been 
a partner of Paul's, is referred to by Tiberius Cavallo in his 
Essay on the Medicinal Properties of Factitious Airs, published in 
1798. Many forms'of apparatus are employed for charging the 
water with the gas. A simple machine for domestic use, called a 
gasogene or seltzogene, consists of two strong glass globes con- 
nected one above the other by a wide glass tube which rises 
nearly to the top of the upper and smaller globe. Surmounting 
the small globe there is a spring valve, fitted to a narrow tube 
that passes through the wide tube to the bottom of the large 
globe. To use the machine, the lower vessel is filled with water, 
and in the upper one, round the base of the wide tube, is placed a 
mixture, commonly of sodium bicarbonate and tartaric acid, 
which with water yields carbon dioxide. The valve head is 
then fastened on, and by tilting the apparatus some water is 
made to flow through the wide tube from the lower to the upper 
vessel. The water in the lower globe takes up the gas thus 
produced, and when required for use is withdrawn by the valve, 
being forced up the narrow tube by the pressure of the gas. 
In another arrangement the gas is supplied compressed in little 
steel capsules, and is liberated into a bottle containing the water 
which has to be aerated. On a large scale, use is made of con- 
tinuously acting machinery which is essentially of the type 
devised by Joseph Bramah. The gas is prepared in a separate 
generator by the action of sulphuric acid on sodium bicarbonate 
or whiting, and after being washed is collected in a gas-holder, 
whence it is forced with water under pressure into a receiver or 
saturator in which an agitator is kept moving. Some manu- 
facturers buy their gas compressed in steel cylinders. The 
water thus aerated or carbonated passes from the receiver, in 
which the pressure may be 100-200 ft on the square inch, to 
bottling machines which fill and close the bottles; if beverages 
like lemonade are being made the requisite quantity of fruit 
syrup is also injected into the bottles, though sometimes the 
fruit syrup mixture is aerated in bulk. For soda water sodium 
bicarbonate should be added to the water before aeration, in 
varying proportions up to about 1 5 grains per pint, but the simple 
carbonated water often does duty instead. Potash water, lithia 
water and many others are similarly prepared, the various salts 
being used in such amounts as are dictated by the experience 
and taste of the manufacturer. Aerated waters are sent out 
from the factories either in siphons {q.v.) or in bottles; the 
latter may be closed by corks, or by screw-stoppers or by internal 
stoppers consisting of a valve, such as a glass ball, held up against 
an indiarubber ring in the neck by the pressure of the gas. For 
use in " soda-fountains " the waters are sent out in large 
cylinders. 

See W. Kirkby, Evolution of Artificial Mineral Waters (Manchester, 
1902). 

AERONAUTICS, the art of " navigating " the " air." It is divis- 
ible into two main branches — aerostation, dealing properly with 
machines which like balloons are lighter than the air, and aviation, 
dealing with the problem of artificial flight by means of flying 
machines which, like birds, are heavier than the air, and also 
with attempts to fly made by human beings by the aid of 
artificial wings fitted to their limbs. 

Historically, aviation is the older of the two, and in the legends 



or myths of men or animals which are supposed to have travelled 
through the air, such as Pegasus, Medea's dragons and Daedalus, 
as well as in Egyptian bas-reliefs, wings appear as the means by 
which aerial locomotion is effected. In later times there are 
many stories of men who have attempted to fly in the same way. 
John Wilkins (1614-1672), one of the founders of the Royal 
Society and bishop of Chester, who in 1640 discussed the possi- 
bility of reaching the moon by volitation, says in his Mathe- 
matical Magick (1648) that it was related that " a certain English 
monk called Elmerus, about the Confessor's time," flew from a 
town in Spain for a distance of more than a furlong; and that 
other persons had flown from St Mark's, Venice, and at Nurem- 
berg. Giovanni Battista Dante, of Perugia, is said to have flown 
several times across Lake Trasimene. At the beginning of the 
1 6th century an Italian alchemist who was collated to the abbacy 
of Tungland, in Galloway, Scotland, by James IV., undertook 
to fly from the walls of Stirling Castle through the air to France. 
He actually attempted the feat, but soon came to the ground 
and broke his thigh-bone in the fall — an accident which he ex- 
plained by asserting that the wings he employed contained some 
fowls' feathers, which had an " affinity " for the dung-hill, whereas 
if they had been composed solely of eagles' feathers they would 
have been attracted to the air. This anecdote furnished Dunbar, 
the Scottish poet, with the subject of one of his rude satires. 
Leonardo da Vinci about the same time approached the problem 
in a more scientific spirit, and his notebooks contain several 
sketches of wings to be fitted to the arms and legs. In the 
following century a lecture on flying delivered in 16 17 by 
Fleyder, rector of the grammar school at Tubingen, and pub- 
lished eleven years later, incited a poor monk to attempt to put 
the theory into practice, but his machinery broke down and he 
was killed. 

In Francis Bacon's Natural History there are two passages 
which refer to flying, though they scarcely bear out the assertion 
made by some writers that he first published the true principles 
of aeronautics. 

The first is styled Experiment Solitary, touching Flying in the Air: 
— " Certainly many birds of good wing (as kites and the like)would 
bear up a good weight as they fly; and spreading feathers thin and 
close, and in great breadth, will likewise bear up a great weight, being 
even laid, without tilting up on the sides. The farther extension of 
this experiment might be thought upon." The second passage is more 
diffuse, but less intelligible ; it is styled Experiment Solitary, touching 
the Flying of unequal Bodies in the Air: — "Let there be a body of 
unequal weight (as of wool and lead or bone and lead) ; if you throw 
it from you with the light end forward, it will turn, and the weightier 
end will recover to be forwards, unless the body be over long. The 
cause is, for that the more dense body hath a more violent pressure 
of the parts from the first impulsion, which is the cause (though 
heretofore not found out, as hath been often said) of all violent 
motions ; and when the hinder part moveth swifter (for that it less 
endureth pressure of parts) than the forward part can make way for 
it, it must needs be that the body turn over; for (turned) it can more 
easily draw forward the lighter part." The fact here alluded to is 
the resistance that bodies experience in moving through the air, 
which, depending on the quantity of surface merely, must exert a 
proportionally greater effect on rare substances. The passage itself, 
however, after making every allowance for the period in which it 
was written, must be deemed confused, obscure and unphilosophical. 

In his posthumous work, De Motu Animalium, published at 
Rome in i68o-i68i,G.A.Borelli gave calculations of the enormous 
strength of the pectoral muscles in birds; and his proposition 
cciv. (vol. i. pp. 322-326), entitled Est impossibile ut homines pro- 
priis viribus artificiose volare possint, points out the impossibility 
of man being able by his muscular strength to give motion to 
wings of sufficient extent to keep him suspended in the air. But 
during his lifetime two Frenchmen, Allard in 1660 and Besnier 
about 1678, are said to have succeeded in making short flights. 
An account of some of the modern attempts to construct flying 
machines will be found in the article Flight and Flying; here 
we append a brief consideration of the mechanical aspects of 
the problem. 

The very first essential for success is safety, which will probably 
only be attained with automatic stability. The underlying principle 
is that the centre of gravity shall at all times be on the same vertical 
line as the centre of pressure. The latter varies with the angle of 
incidence. For square planes it moves approximately as expressed 



AERONAUTICS 



261 



by joessel's formula, C + (o-2 +0-3 sin o) L, in which C is the distance 
frcm the front edge, L the length fore and aft, and a the angle of 
incidence. The movement is different on concave surfaces. The 
term aeroplane is understood to apply to flat sustaining surfaces, 
but experiment indicates that arched surfaces are more efficient. 
S. P. Langley proposed the word aerodrome, which seems the prefer- 
able term for apparatus with wing-like surfaces. This is the type to 
which results point as the proper one for further experiments. With 
this it seems probable that, with well-designed apparatus, 40 to 50 lb 
can be sustained per indicated h.p., or about twice that quantity 
per resistance or " thrust " h.p., and that some 30 or 40% of the 
weight can be devoted to the machinery, thus requiring motors, with 
their propellers, shafting, supplies, &c, weighing less than 20 lb 
per h.p. It is evident that the apparatus must be designed to be as 
light as possible, and also to reduce to a minimum all resistances 
to propulsion. This being kept in view, the strength and conse- 
quent section required for each member may be calculated by the 
methods employed in proportioning bridges, with the difference 
that the support (from air pressure) will be considered as uniformly 
distributed, and the load as concentrated at one or more points. 
Smaller factors of safety may also have to be used. Knowing the 
sections required and unit weights of the materials to be employed, 
the weight of each part can be computed. If a model has been made 
to absolutely exact scale, the weight of the full-sized apparatus 
may approximately be ascertained by the formula 



W ' = W \/(I) S - 



in which W is the weight of the model, S its surface', and W and S' 
the weight and surface of the intended apparatus. Thus if the model 
has been made one-quarter size in its homologous dimensions, the 
supporting surfaces will be sixteen times, and the total weight sixty- 
four times those of the model. The weight and the surface being 
determined, the three most important things to know are the angle 
of incidence, the " lift," and the required speed. The fundamental 
formula for rectangular air pressure is well known: P = KV 2 S, in 
which P is the rectangular normal pressure, in pounds or kilograms, 
K a coefficient (0-0049 for British, and o-ll for metric measures), 
V the velocity in miles per hour or in metres per second, and S the 
surface in square feet or in square metres. The normal on oblique 
surfaces, at various angles of incidence, is given by the formula 
P = KV 2 S?), which latter factor is given both for planes and for arched 
surfaces in the subjoined table: — 

Percentages of Air Pressure at Various Angles 
of Incidence 



Planes (Duchemin For- 






mula, VERIFIED BY LANGLEY). 


Wings (Lilienthal). 


N ■ P 2sina , 


Concavity 1 in 12. 


I+sin 2 a 




















Tan- 


Angle. 

a. 


Nor- 
mal. 
1- 


Lift. 
Tjcosa. 


Drift. 
T^sina. 


Nor- 
mal. 
1- 


Lift. 
7)COSa. 


Drift. 
Tjsino. 


gential 

force. 

a. 


-Q° 








o-o 


0-0 


o-o 


+0-070 


-8° 








0-040 


0-0396 


-0-0055 


+0-067 










0-080 


0-0741 


— 0-0097 


+0-064 


-6° 








0-I2O 


0-1193 


—0-0125 


+0-060 


-s" 








0-160 


0-1594 


-0-0139 


+0-055 


"4° 








O-20O 


0-1995 


-0-0139 


+0-049 


-3° 








0-242 


0-2416 


— 0-0126 


+0-043 


-2° 








0-286 


0-2858 


— O-OIOO 


+0-037 


-i° 








0-332 


0-3318 


—0-0058 


+0-031 


0° 


o-o 


o-o 


O-o 


0-381 


0-3810 


— 0-0 


+0-024 


+ i° 


0-035 


0-035 


0-00061 1 


0-434 


0-434 


+0-0075 


+0-016 


+2 U 


0-070 


0-070 


0-00244 


0-489 


0-489 


+0-0170 


+o-oo8 


+3" 


0-104 


0-104 


0-00543 


0-546 


0-545 


+0-0285 


0-0 


+< 


0-139 


0-139 


0-0097 


o-6oo 


o-597 


+0-0418 


—0-007 


+5° 


0-174 


o-i73 


0-0152 


0-650 


0-647 


+0-0566 


—0-014 


+6° 


0-207 


0-206 


0-0217 


0-696 


0-692 


+0-0727 


— 0-021 


+ K 


0-240 


0-238 


0-0293 


0-737 


0-731 


+0-0898 


— 0-028 


+8° 


0-273 


0-270 


0-0381 


0-771 


0-763 


+0-1072 


-0-035 


+ 9 " 


0-305 


0-300 


0-0477 


0-800 


0-790 


+0-1251 


—0-042 


10° 


0-337 


0-332 


0-0585 


0-825 


0-812 


+0-1432 


-0-050 


n° 


0-369 


0-362 


0-0702 


0-846 


0-830 


+0-1614 


-0-058 


12° 


0-398 


0-390 


0-0828 


0-864 


0-845 


+0-1803 


—0-064 


*K 


0-431 


0419 


0-0971 


0-879 


0-856 


+0-1976 


—0-070 


l < 


0-457 


0-443 


0-H55 


0-891 


0-864 


+0-2156 


-0-074 


15" 


0-486 


0-468 


01240 


0-901 


0-870 


+0-2332 


— 0-076 



The sustaining power, or " lift," which in horizontal flight must 
be equal to the weight, can be calculated by the formula 
L = KV^Stjcoso, or the factor may be taken direct from the table, in 
which the " lift " and the "drift" have been obtained by multiply- 
ing the normal ij by the cosine and sine of the angle. The last column 
shows the tangential pressure on concave surfaces which O. Lilien- 
thal found to possess a propelling component between 3 and 32°, 



KSijcoso' 



W 



and therefore to be negative to the relative wind. Former modes 
of computation indicated angles of 10° to 15° as necessary for sup- 
port with planes. These were prohibitory in consequence of the 
great "drift"; but the present data indicate that, with concave 
surfaces, angles of 2° to 5 will produce adequate " lift." To com- 
pute the latter the angle at which the wings are to be set must first 
be assumed, and that of +3 will generally be found preferable. 
Then the required velocity is next to be computed by the formula 

V = \/- 

or for concave wings at +3 : _ 

V = Vo-545KS- 

Having thus determined the weight, the surface, the angle of inci- 
dence and the required speed for horizontal support, the next step 
is to calculate the power required. This is best accomplished by first 
obtaining the total resistances, which consist of the " drift " and of 
the head resistances due to the hull and framing. The latter are 
arrived at preferably by making a tabular statement showing all 
the spars and parts offering head resistance, and applying to each 
the coefficient appropriate to its " master section," as ascertained by 
experiment. Thus is obtained an " equivalent area " of resistance, 
which is to be multiplied by the wind pressure due to the speed. Care 
must be taken to resolve all the resistances at their proper angle of 
application, and to subtract or add the tangential force, which con- 
sists in the surface S, multiplied by the wind pressure, and by the 
factor in the table, which is, however, o for 3 and 32°, but positive 
or negative at other angles. When the aggregate resistances are 
known, the " thrust h.p." required is obtained by multiplying the 
resistance by the speed, and then allowing for mechanical losses in 
the motor and propeller, which losses will generally be 50% of 
indicated h.p. Close approximations are obtained by the above 
method whenapplied to full-sized apparatus. The following example 
will make the process clearer. The weight to be carried by an appar- 
atus was 189 lb on concave wings of 143-5 sq. ft. area, set at a positive 
angle of 3 . There were in addition rear wings of 29-5 sq. ft., set at 
a negative angle of 3 ; hence, L = i89=o-oo5XV 2 XH3-5Xo-545. 



Whence 



V= A/ — 
V o-i 



189 



= 22 miles per hour, 



■005X143-5X0-545 
at which the air pressure would be 2-42 lb per sq. ft. The area 
of spars and man was 17-86 sq. ft., reduced by various coefficients 
to an " equivalent surface " of 11-70 sq. ft., so that the resistances 
were : — 

Drift front wings, 143-5X0-0285X2-42 . . . =9-90 ft> 
„ rear wings, 29-5 X (0-043 — 0-242 Xo-0523)X2-42 =2-17,, 

Tangential force at 3° =0-00 „ 

Head resistance, 11-70X2-42 . . . . . =28-31 „ 



2-36 h.p. for the 



Total resistance =40-38 lb 

Speed 22 miles per hour. Power = 
" thrust " or 4-72 h.p. for the motor, 
the resistance 40-38 lb, the gliding angle of descent was 



40-38X22 

375 
The weight being 189 lb, and 

40-38 .. 
189 
tangent of 12°, which was verified by many experiments. 

The following expressions will be found useful in computing such 
projects, with the aid of the table above given; — 



1. Wind force, F = KV 2 . 

2. Pressure, P = KV 2 S. 

3. Velocity, V 



V 



W 

KSrjCOSa' 

Surface S varies as yj- 

Normal, N = KSVV, 
Lift, L = KSWosa. 
Weight, W = L = Ncosa. 



8. Drift, D = KSVV»na. 

9. Head area E, get an equiva- 

lent. 

10. Head resistance, H = EF. 

1 1 . Tangential force, T = Pa. 

12. Resistance, R = D+H=T. 

13. Ft. lb, M=RV. 

14. Thrust, h.p., =jJ^ F 



5- 
6. 

7- 

Aerostation. — Possibly the flying dove of Archytas of Tarentum 
is the earliest suggestion of true aerostation. According to Aulus 
Gellius (Nodes Atticae) it was a " model of a dove or pigeon 
formed in wood and so contrived as by a certain mechanical art 
and power to fly: so nicely was it balanced by weights and put 
in motion by hidden and enclosed air." This " hidden and 
enclosed air " may conceivably represent an anticipation of the 
hot-air balloon, but it is at least as probable that the apparent 
flight of the dove was a mere mechanical trick depending on 
the use of fine wires or strings invisible to the spectators. 

In the middle ages vague ideas appear of some ethereal sub- 
stance so light that vessels containing it would remain suspended 
in the air. Roger Bacon (12 14-1294) conceived of a large 
hollow globe made of very thin metal and filled with ethereal 
air or liquid fire, which would float on the atmosphere like a ship 



262 



AERONAUTICS 



on water. Albert of Saxony, who was bishop of Halberstadt 
from 1366 to 1390, had a similar notion, and considered that a 
small portion of the principle of fire enclosed in a light sphere 
would raise it and keep it suspended. The same speculation 
was advanced by Francis Mendoza, a Portuguese Jesuit, who 
died in 1626 at the age of forty-six, and by Gaspar Schott (1608- 
1666), also a Jesuit and professor of mathematics at Wurzburg, 
though for fire he substituted the thin ethereal fluid which he 
believed to float above the atmosphere. So late as 1755 Joseph 
Galien (1600-1782), a Dominican friar and professor of philo- 
sophy and theology in the papal university of Avignon, proposed 
to collect the diffuse air of the upper regions and to enclose it in 
a huge vessel extending more than a mile every way, and intended 
to carry fifty-four times as much weight as did Noah's ark! 
A somewhat different but equally fantastic method of making 
heavy bodies rise is quoted by Schott from Lauretus Laurus, 
according to whom swans' eggs or leather balls filled with nitre, 
sulphur or mercury ascend when exposed to the sun. Laurus 
also stated that hens' eggs filled with dew will ascend in the 
same circumstances, because dew is shed by the stars and drawn 
up again to heaven by the sun's heat during the day. The same 
notion is utilized by Cyrano de Bergerac (1619-1655) in his 
romances describing journeys to the moon and sun, for his 
French traveller fastens round his body a multitude of very 
thin flasks rilled with the morning's dew, whereby through the 
attractive power of the sun's heat on the dew he is raised to 
the middle regions of the atmosphere, to sink again, however, on 
the breaking of some of the flasks. 

A distinct advance on Schott is marked by the scheme for 
aerial.inavigation proposed by the Jesuit, Francis Lana (163 1- 
1687), in his book, published at Brescia in 1670, Prodrome* ovoero 
Saggio di alcune invenzioni nuove promesso all' Arte Maeslra. 

His idea, though useless 
and unpractical in so far 
that it could never be 
carried out, is yet de- 
serving of notice, as the 
principles involved are 
sound; and this can be 
said of no earlier 
attempt. His project 
was to procure four 
copper balls of very 
large dimensions (fig. 1), 
yet so extremely thin 
that after the air was 
exhausted from them 
they would be lighter 
than the air they dis- 
placed and so would 
rise; and to those four 
balls he proposed to 
attach a boat, with sails, 
&c, which would carry 
up a man. He sub- 
mitted the whole matter 
to calculation, and pro- 
posed that the globes should be about 25 ft. in diameter and 
•j-|-jth of an inch in thickness; this would give from all four balls a 
total ascensional force of about 1200 lb, which would be quite 
enough to raise the boat, sails, passengers, &c. But the obvious 
objection to the whole scheme is, that it would be quite im- 
possible to construct a globe "of so large a size and of such small 
thickness which would even support its own weight without col- 
lapsing if placed on the ground, much less bear the external 
atmospheric pressure when the internal air was removed. Lana 
himself noticed this objection, but he thought that the spherical 
form of the copper shell would, notwithstanding its extreme thin- 
ness, enable it, after the exhaustion was effected, to sustain 
the enormous pressure, which, acting equally on every point 
of the surface, would tend to consolidate rather than to break 
the metal. His proposal to exhaust the air from the globes 




Fig. I. — Lana's Aeronautical Machine. 



by attaching to each a tube 36 ft. long, fitted with a stopcock, 
and so producing a Torricellian vacuum, suggests that he was 
ignorant of the invention of the air-pump by Otto von Guericke 
about 1650. 

We now come to the invention of the balloon, which was 
due to Joseph Michel Montgblfier (1740-1810) and Jacques 
fitienne Montgolfier (1745-1700), sons of Pierre Mont- 
golfier, a large and celebrated papermaker at Annonay, ideation 
a town about 40 m. from Lyons. The brothers had balloon. 
observed the suspension of clouds in the atmosphere, 
and it occurred to them that if they could enclose any vapour 
of the nature of a cloud in a large and very light bag, it might 
rise and carry the bag with it into the air. Towards the end of 
1782 they inflated bags with smoke from a fire placed under- 
neath, and found that either the smoke or some vapour emitted 
from the fire did ascend and carry the bag with it. Being thus 
assured of the correctness of their views, they determined to 
have a public ascent of a balloon on a large scale. They accord- 
ingly invited the States of Vivarais, then assembled at Annonay, 
to witness their aerostatic experiment; and on the 5th of June 
1783, in the presence of a considerable concourse of spectators, 
a linen globe of 105 ft. in circumference was inflated over a 
fire fed with small bundles of chopped straw. When released 
it rapidly rose to a great height, and descended, at the expiration 
of ten minutes, at the distance of about ijm. This was the 
discovery of the balloon. The brothers Montgolfier imagined 
that the bag rose because of the levity of the smoke or other 
vapour given forth by the burning straw; and it was not till 
some time later that it was recognized that the ascending power 
was due merely to the lightness of heated air compared to an 
equal volume of air at a lower temperature. In this balloon, 
no source of heat was taken up, so that the air inside rapidly 
cooled, and the balloon soon descended. 

The news of the experiment at Annonay attracted so much 
attention at Paris that Barthelemi Faujas de Saint-Fond (1741- 
1819), afterwards professor of geology at the Musee d'Histoire 
Naturelle, set on foot a subscription for paying the expense of 
repeating the experiment. The balloon was constructed by 
two brothers of the name of Robert, under the superintendence 
of the physicist, J. A. C. Charles. The first suggestion was to 
copy the process of Montgolfier, but Charles proposed the appli- 
cation of hydrogen gas, which was adopted. The filling of the 
balloon, which was made of thin silk varnished with a solution of 
elastic gum, and was about 13 ft. in diameter, was begun on the 
23rd of August 1783, in the Place des Victoires. The hydrogen 
gas was obtained by the action of 
dilute sulphuric acid upon iron 
filings; and was introduced through 
leaden pipes; but as the gas was 
not passed through cold water, great 
difficulty was experienced in filling 
the balloon completely; and alto- 1 
gether about 500 fb of sulphuric acid 
and twice that amount of iron 
filings were used (fig. 2). Bulletins 
were issued daily of the progress of 
the inflation; and the crowd was 
so great that on the 26th the bal- 
loon was moved secretly by night 
to the Champ de Mars, a distance 
of 2 m. On the next day an im- 
mense concourse of people covered 
the Champ de Mars, and every spot 
from which a view could be ob- 
tained was crowded. About five 
o'clock a cannon was discharged as 

the signal for the ascent, and the balloon when liberated rose to 
the height of about 3000 ft. with great rapidity. A shower of 
rain which began to fall directly after it had left the earth in no 
way checked its progress; and the excitement was so great, that 
thousands of well-dressed spectators, many of them ladies, stood 
exposed, watching it intently the whole time it was in sight and 




Fig. 2. — Charles' and 
Robert's Balloon. 



AERONAUTICS 



263 



were drenched to the skin. The balloon, after remaining in the 
air for about three-quarters of an hour, fell in a field near 
Gonesse, about 15 m. off, and terrified the peasantry so much 
that it was torn into shreds by them. Hydrogen gas was at 
this time known by the name of inflammable air; and balloons 
inflated with gas have ever since been called by the people 
air-balloons, the kind invented by the Montgolfiers being desig- 
nated fire-balloons. French writers have also very frequently 
styled them after their inventors, Charlieres and Monlgolfi'eres. 
On the 19th of September 1783 Joseph Montgolfier repeated 
the Annonay experiment at Versailles, in the presence of the 
king, the queen, the court and an immense number of spectators. 
The inflation was begun at one o'clock, and completed in eleven 
minutes, when the balloon rose to the height 6f about 1500 ft., 
and descended after eight minutes, at a distance of about 2 m., 
in the wood of Vaucresson. Suspended below the balloon, 
in a cage, had been placed a sheep, a cock and a duck, which 
were thus the first aerial travellers. They were quite uninjured, 
except the cock, which had its right wing hurt in consequence 
of a kick it had received from the sheep; but this took place 
before the ascent. The balloon, which was painted with orna- 
ments in oil colours, had a very showy appearance (fig. 3). 




Fig. 3. — Montgolfier's Balloon. 

The first human being who ascended in a balloon was Jean 
Francois Pilatre de Rozier (1756-1785), a native of Metz, who 
was appointed superintendent of the natural history collections 
of Louis XVIII. On the 15th of October 1783, and following 
days, he made several ascents (generally alone, but once with 
a companion, Girond de Villette) in a captive balloon (i.e. one 
attached by ropes to the ground) , and demonstrated that there 
was no difficulty in taking up fuel and feeding the fire, which 
was kindled in a brazier suspended under the balloon, when in 
the air. The way being thus prepared for aerial navigation, on 
the 21st of November 1783, Pilatre de Rozier and the marquis 
d'Arlandes first trusted themselves to a free fire-balloon. The 
experiment was made from the Jardin du Chateau de la Muette, 
in the Bois de Boulogne. A large fire-balloon was inflated at 
about two o'clock, rose to a height of about 500 ft., and passing 
over the Invalides and the Ecole Militaire, descended beyond 
the Boulevards, about 9000 yds. from the place of ascent, having 
been between twenty and twenty-five minutes in the air. 

Only ten days later, viz. on the 1st of December 1783, Charles 
ascended from Paris in a balloon inflated with hydrogen gas. 



The balloon, as in the case of the small one of the same kind 
previously launched from the Champ de Mars, was constructed 
by the brothers Robert, one of whom took part in the ascent. 
It was 27 ft. in diameter, and the car was suspended from a 
hoop surrounding the middle of the balloon, and fastened to a 
net, which covered the upper hemisphere. The balloon ascended 
very gently from the Tuileries at a quarter to two o'clock, and 
after remaining for some time at an elevation of about 2000 ft., 
it descended in about two hours at Nesle, a small town about 
27 m. from Paris, when Robert left the car, and Charles made 
a second ascent by himself. He had intended to have replaced 
the weight of his companion by a nearly equivalent quantity 
of ballast; but not having any suitable means of obtaining such 
at the place of descent, and it being just upon sunset, he gave 
the word to let go, and the balloon being thus so greatly lightened, 
ascended very rapidly to a height of about 2 m. After staying 
in the air about half an hour, he descended 3 m. from the 
place of ascent, although he believed the distance traversed, 
owing to different currents, to have been about 9 m. In this 
second journey he experienced a violent pain in his right ear and 
jaw, no doubt produced by the rapidity of the ascent. He also 
witnessed the phenomenon of a double sunset on the same day; 
for when he ascended, the sun had set in the valleys, and as 
he mounted he saw it rise again, and set a second time as he 
descended. 

All the features of the modern balloon as now used are more 
or less due to Charles, who invented the valve at the top, sus- 
pended the car from a hoop, which was itself attached to the 
balloon by netting, &c. With regard to his use of hydrogen gas, 
there are anticipations that must be noticed. As early as 1766 
Henry Cavendish showed that this gas was at least seven times 
lighter than ordinary air, and it immediately occurred to Dr. 
Joseph Black, of Edinburgh, that a thin bag filled with hydrogen 
gas would rise to the ceiling of a room. He provided, accordingly, 
the allantois of a calf, with the view of showing at a public lecture 
such a curious experiment; but for some reason it seems to have 
failed, and Black did not repeat it, thus allowing a great dis- 
covery, almost within his reach, to escape him. Several years 
afterwards a similar idea occurred to Tiberius Cavallo, who found 
that bladders, even when carefully scraped, are too heavy, and 
that China paper is permeable to the gas. But in 1782, the year 
before the invention of the Montgolfiers, he succeeded in elevating 
soap-bubbles by inflating them with hydrogen gas. 

Researches on the use of gas for inflating balloons seem to have 
been carried on at Philadelphia nearly simultaneously with the 
experiments of the Montgolfiers; and when the news .of the 
latter reached America, D. Rittenhouse and F. Hopkinson, 
members of the Philosophical Society at Philadelphia, con- 
structed a machine consisting of forty-seven small hydrogen 
gas-balloons attached to a car or cage. After several preliminary 
experiments, in which animals were let up to a certain height 
by a rope, a carpenter, one James Wilcox, was induced to enter 
the car for a small sum of money; the ropes were cut, and he 
remained in the air about ten minutes, and only then effected 
his descent by making incisions in a number of the balloons, 
through fear of falling into the river, which he was approaching. 

Although the news of the Annonay and subsequent experi- 
ments in France rapidly spread all over Europe, and formed a 
topic of general discussion, still it was not till five first 
months after the Montgolfiers had first publicly sent ascents la 
a balloon into the air that any aerostatic experiment ?"5?' 
was made in England. In November 1783 Count 
Francesco Zambeccari (1756-1812), an Italian who happened to 
be in London, made a balloon of oil-silk, 10 ft. in diameter, 
and weighing n lb. It was publicly shown for several days, 
and on the 25th it was three-quarters filled with hydrogen gas 
and launched from the Artillery ground at one o'clock. It 
descended after two hours and a half near Petworth, in Sussex, 
48 m. from London. This was the first balloon that ascended 
from English ground. On the 22nd of February 1784 a hydrogen 
gas balloon, 5 ft. in diameter, was let up from Sandwich, in 
Kent, and descended at Warneton, in French Flanders, 



264 



AERONAUTICS 




75 m. distant. This was the first balloon that crossed the 
Channel. The first person who rose into the air from British 
ground appears to have been J. Tytler, 1 who ascended from 
the Comely Gardens, Edinburgh, on the 27th of August 1784, 
in a fire-balloon of his own construction. He descended on 
the road to Restalrig, about half a mile from the place where 
he rose. 

But it was Vincent Lunardi who practically introduced 
aerostation into Great Britain. Although Tytler had the 
precedence by a few days still his attempts and partial success 
were all but unknown ; whereas Lunardi's experiments excited 
an enormous amount of enthusiasm in London. He was secre- 
tary to Prince Caramanico, the Neapolitan ambassador, and his 
published letters to his guardian, the chevalier Compagni, 

written while he was carrying 
out his project, and detail- 
ing all the difficulties, &c, he 
met with as they occurred, 
give an interesting and vivid 
account of the whole matter. 
His balloon was 33 ft. in 
circumference (fig.4),and was 
exposed to the public view 
at the Lyceum in the Strand, 
where it was visited by up- 
wards of 20,000 people. He 
originally intended to ascend 
from Chelsea Hospital, but 
the conduct of a crowd at a 
garden at Chelsea, which de- 
stroyed the fire-balloon of a 
Frenchman named de Moret, 
who announced an ascent on 
the nth of August, but was 
unable to keep his word, led 
to the withdrawal of the 
Ultimately he was permitted to 
ascend from the Artillery ground, and on the 15th of September 
1 784 the inflation with hydrogen gas took place. It was intended 
that an English gentleman named Biggin should accompany 
Lunardi; but the crowd becoming impatient, the latter judged 
it prudent to ascend with the balloon only partially full rather 
than risk a longer delay, and accordingly Mr Biggin was obliged 
to leave the car. Lunardi therefore ascended alone, in presence 
of the prince of Wales and an enormous crowd of spectators. 
He took up with him a pigeon, a dog and a cat, and the balloon 
was provided with oars, by means of which he hoped to raise or 
lower it at pleasure. Shortly after starting the pigeon escaped, 
and one of the oars became broken and fell to the ground. In 
about an hour and a half he descended at South Mimms, in 
Hertfordshire, and landed the cat, which had suffered from the 
cold: he then ascended again, and descended, after the lapse of 
about three-quarters of an hour, at Standon, near Ware, where 
he had great difficulty in inducing the peasants to come to his 
assistance; but at length a young woman, taking hold of one 
of the cords, urged the men to follow her example, which they 
then did. The excitement caused by this ascent was immense, 
and Lunardi at once became the star of the hour. He was pre- 
sented to the king, and was courted and flattered on all sides. 
To show the enthusiasm displayed by the people during his 
ascent, he tells himself, in his sixth letter, how a lady, mistaking 
the oar which fell for himself, was so affected by his supposed 
destruction that she died in a few days ; but, on the other hand, 
he says he was told by the judges " that he had certainly saved 
the life of a young man who might possibly be reformed, and be 
to the public a compensation for the death of the lady "; for the 
jury were deliberating on the fate of a criminal, whom they must 
ultimately have condemned, when the balloon appeared, and 
to save time they gave a verdict of acquittal, and the whole court 

1 Mr Tytier contributed largely to, and, indeed, appears to have 
been virtually editor ot, the second edition (1778-1783) of the 
Encyclopaedia Britannica. 



Fig. 4. — Lunardi's Balloon, 
leave that had been granted. 



came out to view the balloon. The king also was in conference 
with his ministers; but on hearing that the balloon was passing, 
he broke up the discussion, and with them watched the balloon 
through telescopes. The balloon was afterwards exhibited in 
the Pantheon. In the latter part of the following year (1785) 
Lunardi made several successful ascents from Kelso, Edinburgh 
and Glasgow (in one of which he traversed a distance of no 
m.) ; these he described in a second series of letters. 

The first ascent from Ireland was made on the 19th of January 
1785 by a Mr Crosbie, who on the following 19th of July at- 
tempted to cross St George's Channel to England but fell into 
the sea. The second person who ascended from Ireland was 
Richard Maguire. Mr Crosbie had inflated his balloon on the 
12th of May 1785, but it was unable to take him up. Maguire 
in these circumstances offered himself as a substitute, and his 
offer being accepted he made the ascent. For this he was 
knighted by the Lord-Lieutenant. Another attempt to cross 
St George's Channel was made by James Sadler on the 1st of 
October 181 2, and he had nearly succeeded when in consequence 
of a change of wind he was forced to descend into the sea off 
Liverpool, whence he was rescued by a fishing-boat. But on 
the 22nd of July 1817 his second son, Windham Sadler, succeeded 
in crossing from Dublin to Holyhead. 

The first balloon voyage across the English Channel was 
accomplished by Jean Pierre Blanchard (1 753-1809) and Dr. J. 
Jeffries, an American physician, on the 7 th of January voyages 
1785. In the preceding year, on the 2nd of March, across 
Blanchard, who was one of the most celebrated of ^jf llsh . 
the earlier aeronauts, made his first voyage from Paris 
in a balloon 27 ft. in diameter (fig. 5), and descended at Billan- 
court near Sevres. 
Just as the balloon 
was about to start, 
a young man jumped 
into the car and draw- 
ing his sword declared 
his determination to 
ascend with Blanch- 
ard. He was ulti- 
mately removed by 
force. It has some- 
times been incorrectly 
stated that he was 
Napoleon Bonaparte ; 
his name in reality 
was Dupont de Cham- 
bon. In their Channel 
crossing Blanchard 
and his companion, 
who started from 
Dover, when about 
one-third across found 
themselves descend- 
ing, and threw out 
every available thing 
from the boat or car. 
When about three- 
quarters across they 
were 




Fig. 5. — Blanchard's Balloon. 



descending A, Balloon of taffeta, 26 ft. in diameter, 
again and had to covered with a net. 

,-t ' . t 1 B, Car suspended by cords from hoop C. 

throw out not only D> D , D> D , Wings worked by rack-work E. 
the anchor and cords, F, Parachute to break the force of descent 
but also to strip and should the balloon burst, 

throw away part of *-*, Tube communicating with inside of 
their clothing, after balloon. 

which they found they were rising, and their last resource, viz. 
to cut away the car, was rendered unnecessary. As they ap- 
proached the shore the balloon rose, describing a magnificent arch 
high over the land. They descended in the forest of Guinnes. 

On the 15th of June 1785, Pilatre de Rozier made an attempt 
to repeat the exploit of Blanchard and Jeffries in the reverse 
direction, and cross from Boulogne to England. For this 



AERONAUTICS 



265 



purpose he contrived a double balloon, which he expected would 
combine the advantages of both kinds — a fire-balloon, 10 ft. in 
diameter, being placed underneath a gas-balloon of 37 ft. in 
diameter, so that by increasing or diminishing the fire in the 
former it might be possible to ascend or descend without waste 
of gas. Rozier was accompanied by P. A. Romain, and for 
rather less than half an hour after the aerostat ascended all 
seemed to be going on well, when suddenly the whole apparatus 
was seen in flames, and the unfortunate adventurers came to 
the ground from the supposed height of more than 3000 ft. 
Rozier was killed on the spot, and Romain only survived about 
ten minutes. A monument was erected on the place where they 
fell, which was near the sea-shore, about 4 m. from the 
starting-point. 

The largest balloon on record (if the contemporary accounts 
are correct) ascended from Lyons on the 19th of January 1784. 
It was more than 100 ft. in diameter, about 130 ft. 
t*-^ in height, and when distended had a capacity, it is 

balloons, said, of over half a million cubic feet. It was called 
the " Flesselles " (from the name of its proprietor, we 
believe), and after having been inflated from a straw fire in 
seventeen minutes, it rose with seven persons in the car to the 
height of about 3000 ft., but descended again after the lapse of 
about a quarter of an hour from the time of starting, in con- 
sequence of a rent in the upper part. 

Another large fire-balloon, 68 ft. in diameter, was constructed 
by the chevalier Paul Andreani of Milan, and on the 25th of 
February he ascended in it from Milan, remaining in the air for 
about twenty minutes. This is usually regarded as the first 
ascent in Italy (but see Monck Mason's Aeronautica, p. 247). 

On the 7th of November 1836, at half-past one o'clock, a 
large balloon containing about 85,000 cub. ft. of gas ascended 
from Vauxhall Gardens, London, carrying Robert Hollond, M.P., 
Monck Mason and Charles Green, and descended about two 
leagues from Weilburg, in the duchy of Nassau, at half-past 
seven the next morning, having thus traversed a distance of 
about 500 m. in 18 hours; Liege was passed in the course of 
the night, and Coblentz in the early morning. In consequence 
of this journey the balloon became famous as the " Nassau 
Balloon " (fig. 6). Charles Green (1785-1870), who constructed 
It and subsequently became its owner, was the most celebrated 
of English aeronauts, and made an extraordinary number of 
ascents. His first, made from the Green Park, London, on the 
19th of July 1 82 1 at the coronation of George IV., was distin- 
guished for the fact that for the first time coal-gas was used 
instead of hydrogen for inflating the balloon. In 1828 he made 
an equestrian ascent from the Eagle Tavern, City Road, London, 
seated on his favourite pony. Such ascents have since been 
repeated; in 1852 Madame Poitevin made one from Cremorne 
Gardens, but was prevented from giving a second performance 
by police interference, the exhibition outraging public opinion. 
It was in descending from the " Nassau Balloon " in a parachute 
that Robert Cocking was killed in 1837 (see Parachute). Green 
was the inventor of the guide-rope, which consists of a long rope 
trailing below the car. Its function is to reduce the waste of gas 
and ballast required to keep the balloon at a proper altitude. 
When a balloon sinks so low that a good deal of the guide-rope 
rests on the ground, it is relieved of so much weight and therefore 
tends to rise; if on the other hand it rises so that most of the 
rope is lifted off the ground, it has to bear a greater weight and 
tends to sink. 

In 1863 A. Nadar, a Paris photographer, constructed " Le 
Geant," which was the largest gas-balloon made up to that time 
and contained over 200,000 cub. ft. of gas. Underneath it 
was placed a smaller balloon, called a compensator, the object 
of which was to prevent loss of gas during the voyage. The 
car had two stories, and was, in fact, a model of a cottage in 
wicker-work, 8 ft. in height by 13 ft. in length, containing a 
small printing-office, a photographic department, a refreshment- 
room, a lavatory, &c. The first ascent took place at five o'clock 
on Sunday the 4th of October 1863, from the Champ de Mars. 
There were thirteen persons in the car, including one lady, the 



princess de la Tour d'Auvergne, and the two aeronauts Louis 
and Jules Godard. In spite of the elaborate preparations that 
had been made and the stores of provisions that were taken up, 
the balloon descended at nine o'clock, at Meaux, the early descent 
being rendered necessary, it was said, bf an accident to the 
valve-line. At a second ascent, made a fortnight later, there 
were nine passengers, including Madame Nadar. The balloon 
descended at the expiration of seventeen hours, near Nienburg 
in Hanover, a distance of about 400 m. A strong wind was 
blowing, and it was dragged over the ground for 7 or 8 m. 
AH the passengers were bruised, and some seriously hurt. The 
balloon and car were then brought to England, and exhibited 
at the Crystal Palace at the end of 1863 and beginning of 1864. 
The two ascents of Nadar's balloon excited an extraordinary 
amount of enthusiasm and interest, vastly out of proportion 
to what they were entitled to. Nadar's idea was to obtain suffi- 
cient money, by the exhibition of his balloon, to carry out a plan 




Fig. 6. — The Great Nassau Balloon. 

of aerial locomotion he had conceived possible by means of the 
principle of the screw; in fact, he spoke of " Le Geant " as " the 
last balloon." He also started U Aeronaute, a newspaper devoted 
to aerostation, and published a small book, which was translated 
into English under the title The Right to Fly. 

Directly after Nadar's two ascents, Eugene Godard con- 
structed a fire-balloon of nearly half a million cubic feet capa- 
city — more than double that of Nadar's and only slightly less 
than that attributed to the " Flesselles " of 1783. The air was 
heated by an 18-ft. stove, weighing, with the chimney, 980 lb. 
This furnace was fed by straw; and the " car " consisted of a 
gallery surrounding it. Two ascents of this balloon, the first 
fire-balloon seen in London, were made from Cremorne Gardens 
in July 1864. After the first journey the balloon descended at 
Greenwich, and after the second at Walthamstow, where it was 
injured by being blown against a tree. Notwithstanding its 
enormous size, Godard asserted that it could be inflated in half 
an hour, and the inflation at Cremorne did not occupy more 
than an hour. In spite of the rapidity with which the inflation 
was effected, few who saw the ascent could fail to receive an 
impression unfavourable to the fire-balloon in the matter of 
safety, as a rough descent, with a heated furnace as it were in 
the car, could not be other than most dangerous. 



266 



AERONAUTICS 



In the summer of 1873 the proprietors of the New York Daily 
Graphic, reviving a project discussed by Green in 1840, deter- 
mined to construct a very large balloon, and enable 
balloon the American aeronaut, John Wise, to realize his 
voyages, favourite scheme of crossing the Atlantic Ocean to 
Europe, by taking advantage of the current from west 
to east which was believed by many to exist constantly at heights 
above 10,000 ft. The project came to nothing owing to the 
quality of the material of which the balloon was made. When it 
was being inflated in September 1873 a rent was observed after 
325,000 cub. ft. of gas had been put in, and the whole rapidly 
collapsed. The size was said to be such as to contain 400,000 
cub. ft., so that it would lift a weight of 14,000 lb. No balloon 
voyage has yet been made of a length comparable to the breadth 
of the Atlantic. In fact only two voyages exceeding 1000 m. 
are on record — that of John Wise from St Louis to Henderson, 
N.Y., 1120 m., in 1859, and that of Count Henry de la Vaulx 
from Paris to Korosticheff in Russia, 1103 m., in 1900. On 
the nth of July 1897 Salomon Andree, with two companions, 
Strendberg and Frankel, ascended from Spitsbergen in a daring 
attempt to reach the North Pole, about 600 m. distant. One 
carrier pigeon, apparently liberated 48 hours after the start, 
was shot, and two floating buoys with messages were found, but 
nothing more was heard of the explorers. 

At an earlydate the balloon was applied to scientific purposes. 
So far back as 1784, Dr Jeffries made an ascent from London in 
_. ._ which he carried out barometric, thermometric and 
ascents. hygrometric observations, also collecting samples of 
the air at different heights. In 1803 the St Petersburg 
Academy of Sciences, entertaining the opinion that the experi- 
ments made on mountain-sides by J. A. Deluc, H. B. de Saus- 
sure, A. von Humboldt and others must give results different 
from those made in free air at the same heights, resolved to 
arrange a balloon ascent. Accordingly, on the 30th of January 
1804, Sacharof, a member of the academy, ascended in a gas- 
balloon, in company with a French aeronaut, E. G. Robertson, 
who at one time gave conjuring entertainments in Paris. The 
ascent was made at a quarter past seven, and the descent effected 
at a quarter to eleven. The height reached was less than i£ m. 
The experiments were not very systematically made, and 
the chief results were the filling and bringing down of several 
flasks of air collected at different elevations, and the supposed 
observation that the magnetic dip was altered. A telescope 
fixed in the bottom of the car and pointing vertically down- 
wards enabled the travellers to ascertain exactly the spot over 
which they were floating at any moment. Sacharof found 
that, on shouting downwards through his speaking-trumpet, 
the echo from the earth was quite distinct, and at his height 
was audible after an interval of about ten seconds (Phil. 
Mag., 1805, 21, p. 193). 

Some of the results reported by Robertson appearing doubtful, 
Laplace proposed to the members of the French Academy of 
Sciences that the funds placed by the government at their dis- 
posal for the prosecution of useful experiments should be utilized 
in sending up balloons to test their accuracy. The proposition 
was supported by J. A. C. Chaptal, the chemist, who was then 
minister of the interior, and accordingly the necessary arrange- 
ments were speedily effected, the charge of the experiments 
being given to L. J. Gay-Lussac and J. B. Biot. The principal 
object of this ascent was to determine whether the magnetic 
force experienced any appreciable diminution at heights above 
the earth's surface. On the 24th of August 1804, Gay-Lussac 
and Biot ascended from the Conservatoire des Arts at ten o'clock 
in the morning. Their magnetic experiments were incommoded 
by the rotation of the balloon, but they found that, up to the 
height of 13,000 ft., the time of vibration of a magnet was ap- 
preciably the same as on the earth's surface. They found also 
that the air became drier as they ascended. The height reached 
was about 13,000 ft., and the temperature declined from 63° 
to 51 F. The descent was effected about half-past one, at 
Meriville, 18 leagues from Paris. 

In a second experiment, which was made on the 16th of Sep- 



tember 1804, Gay-Lussac ascended alone. The balloon left the 
Conservatoire des Arts at 9.40 a.m., and descended at 3.45 p.m. 
between Rouen and Dieppe. The chief result obtained was 
that the magnetic force, like gravitation, did not experience 
any sensible variation at heights from the earth's surface which 
we can attain to. Gay-Lussac also brought down air collected 
at the height of nearly 23,000 ft., and on analysis it appeared 
that its composition was the same as that of air collected at the 
earth's surface. At the time of leaving the earth the thermometer 
stood at 82 F., and at the highest point reached (23,000 ft.) 
it was 14-9° F. Gay-Lussac remarked that at his highest point 
there were still clouds above him. 

From 1804 to 1850 there is no record of any scientific ascents 
in balloons having been undertaken. In the latter year J.- A. 
Bixio (1808-1865) and J. A. Barral (1819-1884) made two ascents 
of this kind. In the first they ascended from the Paris observa- 
tory on the 29th of June 1850, at 10.27 A - M -> the balloon being 
inflated with hydrogen gas. The day was a rough one, and the 
ascent took place without any previous attempt having been 
made to test the ascensional force of the balloon. When liber- 
ated, it rose with great rapidity, and becoming fully inflated it 
pressed upon the network, bulging out at the top and bottom. 
The ropes by which the car was suspended being too short, the 
balloon soon covered the travellers like an immense hood. In 
endeavouring to secure the valve-rope, they made a rent in the 
balloon, a,nd the gas escaped so close to their faces as almost to 
suffocate them. Finding that they were descending then too 
rapidly, they threw overboard everything available, including 
their coats and only excepting the instruments. The ground 
was reached at ioh. 45m., near Lagny. Of course no observa- 
tions were made. Their second ascent was made on the 27 th of 
July, and was remarkable on account of the extreme cold met 
with. At about 20,000 ft. the temperature was 1 5° F., the balloon 
being enveloped in cloud; but on emerging from the cloud, 
at 23,000 ft., the temperature sank to -38° F., no less than 
53 F. below that experienced by Gay-Lussac at the same 
elevation. The existence of these very cold clouds served to 
explain certain meteorological phenomena that were observed 
on the earth both the day before and the day after the ascent. 
Some pigeons were taken up in this, as in most other high 
ascents; when liberated, they showed a reluctance to leave the 
car, and then fell heavily downwards. 

In July 1852 the committee of the Kew Observatory resolved 
to institute a series of balloon ascents, with the view of investi- 
gating such meteorological and physical phenomena as require 
the presence of an observer at a great height in the atmosphere. 
John Welsh (1824-1859) of the Kew Observatory was the 
observer, and the great " Nassau Balloon" was employed, with 
Green himself as the aeronaut. Four ascents were made in 
1852, viz. on the 17th and 26th of August, the 31st of October 
and the 10th of November. The heights attained were 19,510, 
19,100, 12,640 and 22,930 ft., and the lowest temperatures 
met with in the four ascents were 8-7° F. (19,380 ft.), 12-4° F. 
(18,370 ft), 16-4° F. (12,640 ft.) and 10-5° F. (22,370 ft.). 
The decline of temperature was very regular. A siphon baro- 
meter, dry and wet bulb thermometers, aspirated and free, and 
a Regnault hygrometer were taken up. Some air collected at a 
considerable height was found on analysis not to differ appreci- 
ably in its composition from air collected near the ground. For 
the original observations see Phil. Trans., 1853, pp. 311-346. 

At the meeting of the British Association for the Advancement 
of Science held at Aberdeen in 1859, a committee was appointed 
for the purpose of making observations in the higher , 

strata of the atmosphere by means of the balloon. ascents . 
For two years nothing was effected, owing to the want 
both of an observer and of a suitable balloon. After its re- 
appointment at the Manchester meeting of 1861, the committee 
communicated with Henry Tracey Coxwell (1819-1900), an 
aeronaut who had made a good many ascents, and he agreed to 
construct a new balloon, of 90,000 cub. ft. capacity, on the 
condition that the committee would undertake to use it, and pay 
£25 for each high ascent made especially on its behalf, defraying 



AERONAUTICS 



267 



also the cost of gas, &c, so that the expense of each high ascent 
amounted to nearly £50. An observer being still wanted, James 
Glaisher, a member of the committee, offered himself to take 
the observations, and accordingly the first ascent was made on 
the 17th of July 1862, from the gas-works at Wolverhampton, 
this town being chosen on account of its central position in the 
country. Altogether, Glaisher made twenty-eight ascents, the 
last being on the 26th of May 1866. Of these only seven were 
specially high ascents, although six others were undertaken for 
the objects of the committee alone. On the other occasions he 
availed himself of public ascents from the Crystal Palace and 
other places of entertainment, merely taking his place like the 
other passengers. In the last six ascents another aeronaut and 
a smaller balloon were employed. The dates, places of ascent 
and greatest heights (in feet) attained in the twenty-eight 
ascents were — 1862: July 17, Wolverhampton, 26,177; July 30, 
Crystal Palace, 6937; August 18, Wolverhampton, 23,377; 
August 20, Crystal Palace, 5900; August 21, Hendon, 14,355; 
September 1, Crystal Palace, 4190; September 5, Wolverhamp- 
ton, 37,000; September 8, Crystal Palace, 5428. 1863: March 
31, Crystal Palace, 22,884; . April 18, Crystal Palace, 24,163; 
June 26, Wolverton, 23,200; July n, Crystal Palace, 6623; 
July 21, Crystal Palace, 3298; August 31, Newcastle-upon- 
Tyne, 8033; September 29, Wolverhampton, 16,590; October 9, 
Crystal Palace, 7310. 1864: January 12, Woolwich, 11,897; 
April 6, Woolwich, 11,075; June 13, Crystal Palace, 3543; 
June 20, Derby, 4280; June 27, Crystal Palace, 4898; August 
29, Crystal Palace, 14,581; December 1, Woolwich, 5431; 
December 30, Woolwich, 3735. 1865: February 27, Woolwich, 
4865; October 2, Woolwich, 1949; December 2, Woolwich, 
4628. 1866: May 26, Windsor, 6325. 

The primary object of the ascents was to determine the 
temperature of the air, and its hygrometrical state at different 
elevations to as great a height as could be reached; and the 
secondary objects were — (1) to determine the temperature of 
the dew-point by Daniell's and Regnault's hygrometers, as well 
as by the dry and wet bulb thermometers, and to compare the 
results; (2) to compare the readings of an aneroid barometer 
with those of a mercurial barometer up to the height of .5 m. ; 
(3) to determine the electrical state of the air, (4) the oxygenic 
condition of the atmosphere, and (5) the time of vibration of a 
magnet; (6) to collect air at different elevations; (7) to note 
the height and kind of clouds, their density and thickness; (8) 
to determine the rate and direction of different currents in the 
atmosphere; and (9) to make observations on sound. The 
instruments used were mercurial and aneroid barometers, dry 
and wet bulb thermometers, Daniell's dew-point hygrometer, 
Regnault's condensing hygrometer, maximum and minimum 
thermometers, a magnet for horizontal vibration, hermetically 
sealed glass tubes exhausted of air, and an electrometer. In 
one or two of the ascents a camera was taken up. 

The complete observations, both as made and after reduction, 
are printed in the British'- Association Reports, 1 862-1 866; here 
only a general account of the results can be given. It appeared 
that the rate of the decline of temperature with elevation near 
the earth was very different according as the sky was clear or 
cloudy; and the equality of temperature at sunset and increase 
with height after sunset were very remarkable facts which were 
not anticipated. Even at the height of 5 m., cirrus clouds were 
seen high in the air, apparently as far above as they seem 
when viewed from the earth. The results of the observations 
differed very much, and no doubt the atmospheric conditions 
depended not only on the time of day, but also on the season of 
the year, and were such that a vast number of ascents would be 
requisite to determine the true laws with anything approaching 
to certainty and completeness. It was also clear that England 
is a most unfit country for the pursuit of such investigations, as, 
from whatever place the balloon started, it was never safe to be 
more than an hour above the clouds for fear of reaching the sea. 
It appeared from the observations that an aneroid barometer 
could be trusted to read as accurately as a mercurial barometer 
to the heights reached. The time of vibration of a horizontal 



magnet was taken in very many of the ascents, and the results 
of ten different sets of observations indicated that the time of 
vibration was longer than on the earth. In almost all the 
ascents the balloon was under the influence of currents of air in 
different directions which varied greatly in thickness. The direc- 
tion of the wind on the earth was sometimes that of the whole 
mass of air up to 20,000 ft., whilst at other times the direction 
changed within 500 ft. of the earth. Sometimes directly oppo- 
site currents were met with at different heights in the same 
ascent, and three or four streams of air were encountered moving 
in different directions. The direct distances between the places 
of ascent and descent, apart from the movements of the balloon 
under the influence of these various currents, were always very 
much greater than the horizontal movement of the air as meas- 
ured by anemometers. For example, on the 12th of January 
1862, the balloon left Woolwich at 2I1. 8m. p.m., and descended 
at Lakenheath ; 70 m. distant from the place of ascent, at 4I1. 
19m. p.m. At the Greenwich Observatory, by a Robinson 
anemometer, during this time the motion of the air was 6 m. 
only. With regard to physiological observations, Glaisher found 
that the frequency of his pulse increased with elevation, as 
also did the number of inspirations. The number of his pulsa- 
tions was generally 76 per minute before starting, about 90 at 
10,000 ft., 100 at 20,000 ft., and no at higher elevations. 
But a good deal depended on the temperament of the individual. 
This was also the case in respect to colour; at 10,000 ft. the 
faces of some would be a glowing purple, whilst others would be 
scarcely affected; at 4 m. high Glaisher found the pulsations 
of his heart distinctly audible, and his breathing was very much 
affected, so that panting was produced by the slightest exertion; 
at 29,000 ft. he became insensible. In reference to the propa- 
gation of sound, it was at all times found that sounds from the 
earth were more or less audible according to the amount of mois- 
ture in the air. When in clouds at 4 m. high, a railway train 
was heard; but when clouds were far below, no sound ever 
reached the ear at this elevation. The discharge of a gun was 
heard at 10,000 ft. The barking of a dog was heard at the 
height of 2 m., while the shouting of a multitude of people 
was not audible at heights exceeding 4000 ft. In his ascent 
of the 5th of September 1862, Glaisher considered that he 
reached a height of 37,000 ft. But that figure was based, not 
on actual record, but on the circumstances that at 29,000 ft., 
when he became insensible, the balloon was rising 1000 ft. a 
minute, and that when he recovered consciousness thirteen 
minutes later it was falling 2000 ft. a minute, and the accuracy 
of his conclusions has been questioned. Few scientific men 
have imitated Glaisher in making high ascents for meteorological 
observations. In 1867 and 1868 Camille Flammarion made 
eight or nine ascents from Paris for scientific purposes. The 
heights attained were not great, but the general result was to 
confirm the observations of Glaisher; for an account see Voyages 
aeriens, Paris, 1870, or Travels in the Air, London, 1871, in 
which also some ascents by W. de Fonvielle are noticed. On 
the 15th of April 1875, H. T. Sivel, J. E. Croce-Spinelli and 
Gaston Tissandier ascended from Paris in the balloon " Zenith," 
and reached a height of 27,950 ft.; but only Tissandier came 
down alive, his two companions being asphyxiated. This put an 
end to such attempts for a time. But Dr A. Berson and Lieut. 
Gross attained 25,840 ft. on the nth of May 1894; Berson, 
ascending alone from Strassfurt on the 4th of December 1894, 
attained about 31,500 ft. and recorded a temperature of —54° F.; 
and Berson and Stanley Spencer are stated by the latter to 
have attained 27,500 ft. on the 15th of September 1898 when 
they ascended in a hydrogen balloon from the Crystal Palace, 
the thermometer registering — 29 F. On the 31st of July 1901, 
Berson and R. J. Siiring, ascending at Berlin, actually noted 
a barometric reading corresponding to a height of 34,5°° ft., 
and possibly rose 1000 or 1500 ft. higher, though in spite of 
oxygen inhalations they were unconscious during the highest 
portion of the ascent. 

The personal danger attending high ascents led Gustave 
Hermite and Besancon in November 1892 to inaugurate the 



268 



AERONAUTICS 



sending up of unmanned balloons {ballons sondes) equipped with 
automatic recording instruments, and kites (q.v.) have also 
been employed for similar meteorological purposes. (See also 
Meteorology.) 

The balloon had not been discovered very long before it 
received a military status, and soon after the beginning of the 
French revolutionary war an aeronautic school was 
balloons. f° un ded at Meudon, in charge of Guyton de Morveau, 
the chemist, and Colonel J. M. J. Coutelle (1748-1835). 
Four balloons were constructed for the armies of the north, of 
the Sambre and Meuse, of the Rhine and Moselle, and of Egypt. 
In June r794 Coutelle ascended with the adjutant and general 
to reconnoitre the hostile army just before the battle of Fleurus, 
and two reconnaissances were made, each occupying four hours. 
It is generally stated that it was to the information so gained 
that the French victory was due. The balloon corps was in 
constant requisition during the campaign, but it does not appear 
that, with the exception of the reconnaissances just mentioned, 
any great advantages resulted, except in a moral point of view. 
But even this was of importance, as the enemy were much dis- 
concerted at having their movements so completely watched, 
while the French were correspondingly elated at the superior 
information it was believed they were gaining.- An attempt 
was made to revive the use of balloons in the African campaign 
of 1830, but no opportunity occurred in which they could be 
employed. It is said that in 1849 a reconnoitring balloon was 
sent up from before Venice, as also were small balloons loaded 
with bombs to be exploded by time-fuses. In the French cam- 
paign against Italy in 1859 the French had recourse to the use 
of balloons, but this time there was not any aerostatic corps, 
and their management was entrusted to the brothers Godard. 
Several reconnaissances were made, and one of especial interest 
the day before the battle of Solferino. No information of much 
importance seems, however, to have been gained thereby. 

In the American Civil War (1861) balloons were a good deal 
used by the Federals. There was a regular balloon staff attached 
to McClellan's army, with a captain, an assistant-captain and 
about 50 non-commissioned officers and privates. The apparatus 
consisted of two generators, drawn by four horses each; two 
balloons, drawn by four horses each, and an acid-cart, drawn by 
two horses. The two balloons used contained about 13,000 and 
26,000 ft. of gas, and the inflation usually occupied about 
three hours. (See Royal Engineers' Papers, vol. xii.) By their 
aid useful information was gained about the enemy round 
Richmond and in other places, but eventually difficulties of 
transport and the topography of the theatre of war made balloon- 
ing impracticable; and little was heard of it after the first two 
years of the war. 

The balloon proved itself very valuable during the siege of 
Paris (1870-71). It was by it alone that communication was 
kept up between the besieged city and the external world, as 
the balloons carried away from Paris the pigeons which after- 
wards brought back to it the news of the provinces. The total 
number of balloons that ascended from Paris during the siege, 
conveying persons and despatches, was sixty-four — the first 
having started on the 23rd of September 1870, and the last on 
the 28th of January 187 1. Gambetta effected his escape from 
Paris, on the 7th of October, in the balloon "Armand-Barbes," 
an event which doubtless led to the prolongation of the war. 
Of the sixty-four balloons only two were never heard of; they 
were blown out to sea. One of the most remarkable voyages 
was that of the " Ville d'Orleans," which, leaving Paris at 
eleven o'clock on the 21st of November, descended fifteen hours 
afterwards near Christiania, having crossed the North Sea. 
Several of the balloons on their descent were taken by the 
Prussians, and a good many were fired at while in the air. The 
average size of the balloons was from 2000 to 2050 metres, or 
from 70,000 to 72,000 cub. ft. The above facts are extracted 
from Les Ballons du siig* de Paris, a sheet published by Bulla 
and Sons, Paris, and compiled by the brothers Tissandier, well- 
known French aeronauts, which gives the name, size and times 
of ascent and descent of every balloon that left Paris, with the 



names of the aeronaut and generally also of the passengers, the 
weight of despatches, the number of pigeons, &c. Only those 
balloons, however, are noticed in which some person ascended. 
The balloons were manufactured and despatched (generally 
from the platforms of the Orleans or the Northern railway) 
under the direction of the Post Office. The aeronauts employed 
were mostly sailors, who did their work very well. No use 
whatever was made in the war of balloons for purposes of 
reconnaissance. 

Ballooning, however, as a recognized military science, only 
dates back to about the year 1883 or 1884, when most of the 
powers organized regular balloon establishments. In 1884-85 
the French found balloons very useful during their campaign 
in Tongking; and the British government also despatched 
balloons with the Bechuanaland expedition, and also with that 
to Suakin in those years. During the latter campaign several 
ascents were made in the presence of the enemy, on whom it 
was said that a great moral effect was produced. The employ- 
ment of balloons has been common in nearly all modern wars. 

We may briefly describe the apparatus used in military operations. 
The French in the campaigns of the 19th century used varnished silk 
balloons of about 10,000 cub. ft. capacity. The Americans in the 
Civil War used much larger ones,, those of 26,000 cub. ft. being 
found the most suitable. These were also of varnished silk. In the 
present day most nations use balloons of about 20,000 cub. ft., 
made of varnished cambric ; but the British war balloons, made of 
goldbeater skin, are usually of comparatively small size, the normal 
capacity being 10,000 cub. ft., though others of 7000 and 4500 
cub. ft. have also been used, as at Suakin. The usual shape is 
spherical; but since 1896 the Germans, and now other nations, have 
adopted a long cylindrical-shaped balloon, so affixed to its cable as 
to present an inclined surface to the wind and thus act partly on the 
principle of a kite. Though coal-gas and even hot air may occasion- 
ally be used for inflation, hydrogen gas is on account of its lightness 
far preferable. In the early days of ballooning this had to be manu- 
factured in the field, but nowadays it is almost universally carried 
compressed in steel tubes. About 100 such tubes, each weighing 
75 ft, are required to fill a 10,000-ft. balloon. Tubes of greater 
capacity have also been tried. 

The balloon is almost always used captive. If allowed to go free 
it will usually be rapidly carried away by the wind and the results 
of the observations cannot easily be transmitted back. Occasions 
may occur when such ascents will be of value, but the usual method 
is to send up a captive balloon to a height of somewhere about 1000 ft. 
With the standard British balloon two officers are sent up, one 
of whom has now particularly to attend to the management of the 
balloon, while the other makes the observations. 

With regard to observations from captive balloons much depends 
on circumstances. In a thickly wooded country, such as that in 
which the balloons were used in the American Civil War, and in the 
war in Cuba (in which the balloon merely served to expose the troops 
to severe fire), no very valuable information is, as a rule, to be ob- 
tained; but in fairly open country all important movements of 
troops should be discernible by an experienced observer at any point 
within about four or five miles of the balloon. The circumstances, 
it may be mentioned, are such as would usually preclude one un- 
accustomed to ballooning from affording valuable reports. Not only 
is he liable to be disturbed by the novel and apparently hazardous 
situation, but troops and features of the ground often have so 
peculiar an appearance from that point of view, that a novice will 
often have a difficulty in deciding whether an object be a column of 
troops or a ploughed field. Then again, much will depend on atmo- 
spheric conditions. Thus, in misty weather a balloon is well-nigh 
useless; and in strong winds, with a velocity of anything over 20 m. 
an hour, efficient observation becomes a matter of difficulty. When 
some special point has to be reported on, such as whether there is 
any large body of troops behind a certain hill or wood, a rapid 
ascent may still be made in winds up to 30 m. an hour, but the 
balloon would then be so unsteady that no careful scouting could be 
made. It is usually estimated that a successful captive ascent can 
only be made in England on half the days of the year. _ As a general 
rule balloon ascents would be made for one of the following objects : — 
to examine the country for an enemy; to reconnoitre the enemy's 
position ; to ascertain the strength of his force, number of guns and 
exact situation of the various arms; also to note the plan of his 
earthworks or fortifications. During an action the aerial observer 
would be on the look-out for any movements of the enemy and give 
warning of flank attacks or surprises. Such an observer could also 
keep the general informed as to the progress of various detached 
parties of his own force, as to the advance of reinforcements, or to 
the conduct of any fighting going on at a distance. Balloon observa- 
tions are also of especial aid to artillery in correcting their aim. 

The vulnerability of a captive balloon to the enemy's fire has been 
tested by many experiments with variable results. One established 



AERONAUTICS 




Fig. i.— CLEMENT-BAYARD DIRIGIBLE. 



Photo, Topical Press. 




Fig. 2— ZEPPELIN VII. (DEUTSCHLAND), WRECKED JUNE 28, 1910. 



Photo, Topical Press. 



AERONAUTICS 




Fig. 3.— BRITISH ARMY DIRIGIBLE, BETA. 



Photo, Topical Press. 




Fig. 4.— PARSEVAL DIRIGIBLE. 



Photo, Topical Press. 



AERONAUTICS 



269 



fact is that the range of a balloon in mid-air is extremely difficult 
to judge, and, as its altitude can be very rapidly altered, it becomes 
a very difficult mark for artillery to hit. A few bullet-holes in the 
fabric of a balloon make but little difference, since the size of the 
perforation is very minute as compared with the great surface of 
material, but on the other hand, a shrapnel bursting just in front of 
it may cause a rapid fall. It is therefore considered prudent to keep 
the balloon well away from an enemy, and two miles are laid down 
as the nearest approach it should make habitually. 

Besides being of use on land for war purposes, balloons have also 
been tried in connexion with the naval service. In France especially 
regular trials have been made of inflating balloons on board ships, 
and sending them aloft as a look-out; but it is now generally con- 
tended that the difficulties of storing the gas and of manoeuvring the 
balloon are so great on board ship as to be hardly worth the results 
to be gained. 

A very important development of military ballooning is that of 
the navigable balloon. If only a balloon could be sent up and. driven 
in any required direction, and brought back to its starting-point, 
it is obvious that it would be of the very greatest use in war. 

From the very first invention of balloons the problem has 
been how to navigate them by propulsion. General J. B. M. C. 

Meusnier (1754-1793) proposed an elongated balloon 
baitooas * n J 7^4- It was experimented on by the brothers 

Robert, who made two ascensions and claimed to 
have obtained a deviation of 22° from the direction of a light 
wind by means of aerial oars worked by hand. The relative 
speed was probably about 3 m. an hour, and it was so evident 
that a very rrruch more energetic light motor than any then 
known was required to stem ordinary winds that nothing more 
was attempted till 1852, when Henri Giffard (1825-1882) as- 
cended with a steam-engine of then unprecedented lightness. 
The subjoined table exhibits some of the results subsequently 
obtained : — 







Experiments with Dirigible Balloons 








Year. 


Inventor. 


Length. 


Dia- 
meter. 


Con- 
tents. 


Lifting 
Capa- 
city. 


Weight 

of 
Balloon. 


Weight 

of 
Motor. 


H.P. 


Speed 

per 
hour. 


1852 
1872 

1884 
1885 

1897 

1900 
1901 

1908 
1908 


Giffard . . . 
Dupuy de 

L6me . . . 
Tissandier 
Renard and 

Krebs . . 

Schwarz . . 

Zeppelin I. 
Santos Du- 
mont VI. 
" Republique " 
Zeppelin IV. . 


Ft. 
144 

118 
92 

165 
157 
420 

108 

195 
446 


Ft. 
39 

49 
3° 

27 

IS) 

39 

20 

35 
42 i 


Cub. ft. 
88,300 

120,088 
37.439 

65,836 
130,500 
400,000 

22,200 
130,000 
450,000 


lb. 
3.978 

8,358 
2,728- 

4,402 

8,133 
25,000 

3,100 


lb. 

2,794 

4,728 
933 

2,449 

6,800 

19,000 


lb. 
462 

2000 
616 

1174 
800? 
1500 


3-0 

o-8 
i-5 

9-0 
16-0 
32-0 

16-20 

80 
220 


Miles. 
6-71 

6-26 

7-82 

14-00 
17-00 
18-00 

19-00 
3° 



Giffard, the future inventor of the injector, devised a steam- 
engine weighing, with fuel and water for one hour, 154 lb per 
horse-power, and was bold enough to employ it in proximity to 
a balloon inflated with coal gas. He was not able to stem a 
medium wind, but attained some deviation. He repeated the 
experiment in 1855 with a more elongated spindle, which proved 
unstable and dangerous. During the siege of Paris the French 
government decided to build a navigable balloon, and entrusted 
the work to the chief naval constructor, Dupuy de Lome. He 
went into the subject very carefully, made estimates of all the 
strains, resistances and speeds, and tested the balloon in 1872. 
Deviations of 12 were obtained from the course of a wind blow- 
ing 27 to 37 m. per hour. The screw propeller was driven by 
eight labourers, a steam-engine being deemed too dangerous; 
but it was estimated that had one been used, weighing as much 
as the men, the speed would have been doubled. Tissandier 
and his brother applied an electric motor, lighter than any pre- 
viously built, to a spindle-shaped balloon, and went up twice in 
1883 and 1884. On the latter occasion he stemmed a wind of 
7 m. per hour. The brothers abandoned these experiments, 
which had been carried on at their own expense, when the French 
War Department took up the problem. Renard and Krebs, the 
officers in charge of the War Aeronautical Department at 
Meudon, built and experimented with in 1884 and 1885 the fusi- 



form balloon " La France," in which the " master " or maximum 
section was about one-quarter of the distance from the stem. 
The propelling screw was at the front of the car and driven by 
an electric motor of unprecedented lightness. Seven ascents 
were made on very calm days, a maximum speed of 14 m. an 
hour was obtained, and the balloon returned to its starting-point 
on five of the seven occasions. Subsequently another balloon 
was constructed, said to be capable of a speed of 22 to 28 m. 
per hour, with a different motor. After many years of experi- 
ment Dr Wolfert built and experimented with in Berlin, in 1897, 
a cigar-shaped balloon driven by a gasoline motor. An explosion 
took place in the air, the balloon fell and Dr Wolfert and his 
assistant were killed. It was also in 1897 that an aluminium 
balloon was built from the designs of D. Schwarz and tested in 
Berlin. It was driven by a Daimler benzine motor, and attained 
a greater speed than " La France "; but a driving belt slipped, 
and in coming down the balloon was injured beyond repair. 

From 1897 onwards Count Ferdinand von Zeppelin, of the 
German army, was engaged in constructing an immense balloon, 
truly an airship, of most careful and most intelligent design, to 
carry five men. It consisted of an aluminium framework con- 
taining sixteen gas bags with a total capacity of nearly 400,000 
cub. ft., and it had two cars, each containing a 16 h.p. motor. 
It was first tested in June 1900, when it attained a speed of 
18 m. an hour and travelled a distance of 35 m. before an 
accident to the steering gear necessitated the discontinuance of 
the experiment. In 1905 Zeppelin built a second airship which 
had a slightly smaller capacity but much greater power, its 
two motors each developing 85 h.p. This, after making some 
successful trips, was wrecked in a violent gale, and was succeeded 
by a third airship, which, at its trial in October 1906, travelled 
round Lake Constance and showed 
itself able to execute numerous curves 
and traverses. At a second series of 
trials in September 1907, after some 
alterations had been effected, it 
attained a speed of 36 m. an hour, 
remaining in the air for many hours 
and carrying nine or eleven passengers. 
A fourth vessel of similar design, but 
with more powerful motors, was tried 
in 1908, and succeeded in travelling 
250 m. in 11 hours, but owing to a 
storm it was wrecked when on land 
and burnt at Echterdingen on the 5 th 
of August. Subscriptions, headed by 
the emperor, were at once raised to 
enable Zeppelin to build another. 
Meanwhile in 1901 Alberto Santos Dumont had begun ex- 
periments with dirigible balloons in Paris, and on the 19th of 
October won the Deutsch prize by steering a balloon from St 
Cloud round the Eiffel tower and back in half an hour, encounter- 
ing on his return journey a wind of nearly 5 metres a second. 
An airship constructed by Pierre and Paul Lebaudy in 1904 
also made a number of successful trials in the vicinity of Paris; 
with a motor of 40 h.p., its speed was about 25 m. an hour, 
and it regularly carried three passengers. In October 1907 the 
" Nulli Secundus," an airship constructed for the British War 
Office, sailed from Farnborough round St Paul's Cathedral, 
London, to the Crystal Palace, Sydenham, a distance of about 
50 m., in 3 hours 35 minutes. The weight carried, including 
two occupants, was 3400 lb, and the maximum speed was 24 m. 
an hour, with a following wind of 8 m. an hour. 

Thus the principles which govern the design of the dirigible 
balloon may be said to have been evolved. As the lifting power 
grows as the cube of the dimensions, and the resistance approxi- 
mately as the square, the advantage lies with the larger sizes of 
balloons, as of ocean steamers, up to the limits within which 
they may be found practicable. Count Zeppelin gained an ad- 
vantage by attaching his propellers to the balloon, instead of to 
the car as heretofore; but this requires a rigid framework and a 
great increase of weight. Le Compagnon endeavoured, in 1892, 



270 



AEROTHERAPEUTICS 



to substitute flapping wings for rotary propellers, as the former 
can be suspended near the centre of resistance. C. Danilewsky 
followed him in 1898 and 1899, but without remarkable results. 
DuDuy de Lome was the first to estimate in detail the resistances 
to balloon propulsion, but experiment showed that in the 
aggregate they were greater than he calculated. Renard and 
Krebs also found that their computed resistances were largely 
exceeded, and after revising the results they gave the formula 
R = o-oi685 D 2 V 2 , R being the resistance in kilograms, D the 
diameter in metres and V the velocity in metres per second. 
Reduced to British measures, in pounds, feet and miles per 
hour, R = 0-0006876 D 2 V 2 , which is somewhat in excess of the 
formula computed by Dr William Pole from Dupuy de Lome's 
experiments. The above coefficient applies only to the shape 
and rigging of the balloon " La France," and combines all resist- 
ances into one equivalent, which is equal to that of a flat plane 
18% of the "master section." This coefficient may perhaps 
hereafter be reduced by one-half through a better form of hull 
and car, more like a fish than a spindle, by diminished sections 
of suspension lines and net, and by placing the propeller at the 
centre of resistance. To compute the results to be expected 
from new projects, it will be preferable to estimate the resistances 
in detail. The following table shows how this was done by 
Dupuy de Lome, and the probable corrections which should 
have been made by him: — 



Resistances — Du 


puy de Lome's 


Balloon 




Computed by Dupuy de L6me. 


MoreProbableValues. 


V = 


= 2-22 m. per sec. 




V = 2-82 m. 


Der sec. 




Area, 


Co- 


Air 


Resist- 


Co- 


Air 


Resist- 


Part. 


Sq. 


effici- 


Pres- 


ance, 


effici- 


Pres- 


ance, 




Metres. 


ent. 


sure. 


Kg. 


ent. 


sure. 


Kg. 


Hull, with- 
















out net. . 


172-96 


1/30 


0-665 


3-830 


I/I5 


0-875 


10-091 


Car . 


3-25 


i/5 


,, 


0-432 


i/5 


,, 


0-569 


Men's bodies 


3-00 


i/S 


,, 


0-400 


1/2 




1-312 


Gas tubes . 


6-40 


i/5 


,, 


0-850 


1/2 




2-750 


Small cords 


IO-OO 


1/2 


,, 


3-325 


1/2 


,, 


4-375 


Large cords 


9-90 


i/3 


" 


2-194 


i/3 


X 


2-887 


11-031 


21-984 



When the resistances have been reduced to the lowest possible 
minimum by careful design, the attainable speed must depend 
upon the efficiency of the propeller and the relative lightness of 
the motor. The commercial uses of dirigible balloons, however, 
will be small, as they must remain housed when the wind aloft 
is brisk. The sizes will be great and costly, the loads small, and 
the craft frail and short-lived, yet dirigible balloons constitute 
the obvious type for governments to evolve, until they are super- 
seded by efficient flying machines. (See further, as to the latter, 
the article Flight and Flying.) 

The chief danger attending ballooning lies in the descent; for 
if a strong wind be blowing, the grapnel will sometimes trail for 
miles over the ground at the rate of ten or twenty miles 
Practice an hour, catching now and then in hedges, ditches, roots 
station. °f trees > & c '> and, after giving the balloon a terrible 
jerk , breaking loose again, till at length some obstruction, 
such as the wooded bank of a stream, affords a firm hold. This 
danger, however, has been much reduced by the use of the 
" ripping-cord," which enables a panel to be ripped open and 
the balloon to be completely deflated in a few seconds, just as it 
is reaching the earth. But even a very rough descent is usually 
not productive of any very serious consequences; as, although 
the occupants of the car generally receive many bruises and are 
perhaps cut by the ropes, it rarely happens that anything worse 
occurs. On a day when the wind is light (supposing that there 
is no want of ballast) nothing can be easier than the descent, 
and the aeronaut can decide several miles off on the field in 
which he will alight. It is very important to have a good supply 
of ballast, so as to be able to check the rapidity of the descent, 
as in passing downwards through a wet cloud the weight of 
the balloon is enormously increased by the water deposited on 
it; and if there is no ballast to throw out in compensation, the 



velocity is sometimes very great. It is also convenient, if the 
district upon which the balloon is descending appear unsuitable 
for landing, to be able to rise again. The ballast consists of fine 
baked sand, which becomes so scattered as to be inappreciable 
before it has fallen far below the balloon. It is taken up in bags 
containing about f cwt. each. The balloon at starting is liberated 
by a spring catch which the aeronaut releases, and the ballast 
should be so adjusted that there is nearly equilibrium before 
leaving, else the rapidity of ascent is too great, and has to be 
checked by parting with gas. It is almost impossible to liberate 
the balloon in such a way as to avoid giving it a rotary motion 
about a vertical axis, which continues during the whole time it 
is in the air. This rotation makes it difficult for those in the car 
to discover in what direction they are moving; and it is only 
by looking down along the rope to which the grapnel is suspended 
that the motion of the balloon over the country below can be 
traced. The upward and downward motion at any instant is 
at once known by merely dropping over the side of the car a 
small piece of paper: if the paper ascends or remains on the 
same level or stationary, the balloon is descending; while, if 
it descends, the balloon is ascending. This test is exceedingly 
delicate. 

References. — Tiberius Cavallo, Treatise on the Nature and Prop- 
erties of Air and other permanently Elastic Fluids (London, 1781); 
Idem, History and Practice of Aerostation (London, 1785); Vincent 
Lunardi, Account of the First Aerial Voyage in England, in a Series 
of Letters to his Guardian (London, 1785) ; T. Forster, Annals of some 
Remarkable Aerial and Alpine Voyages (London, 1832) ;MonckMason, 
Aeronautica (London, 1838); John Wise, A System of Aeronautics, 
comprehending its Earliest Investigations (Philadelphia, 1850); 
Hatton Turnor, Astra Castra, Experiments and Adventures in the 
Atmosphere (London, 1865); J. Glaisher, C. Flammarion, W. de 
Fonvielle and G. Tissandier, Voyages aeriens (Paris, 1870) (translated 
and edited by James Glaisher under the title Travels in the Air 
(London, 1871); O. Chanute, Progress in Flying Machines (New 
York, 1894) ; W. de Fonvielle, Les Ballons sondes (Paris, 1899) ; Idem, 
Histoire de la navigation aerienne (Paris, 1907) ; F. Walker, Aerial 
Navigation (London, 1902) ; J. Lecornu, La Navigation aerienne 
(Paris, 1903) ; M. L. Marchis, Lecons surla navigation aerienne (Paris, 
1904), containing many references to books and periodicals on 
pp. 701-704; Navigating the Air (papers collected by the Aero Club 
of America) (New York, 1907) ; A. Hildebrandt, Airships past and 
present (London, 1908). 

AEROTHERAPEUTICS, the treatment of disease by atmo- 
spheric air: a term which of late has come to be used somewhat 
more loosely to include also pneumotherapieutics, or the treat- 
ment of disease by artificially prepared atmospheres. The 
physical and chemical properties of atmospheric air, under 
ordinary pressure or under modified pressure, may be thera- 
peutically utilized either on the external surface of the body, on 
the respiratory surface, or on both surfaces together. Also 
modifications may be induced in the ventilation of the lungs by 
general gymnastics or respiratory gymnastics.. 

The beneficial effects of air under ordinary pressure are now 
utilized in the open-air treatment of phthisical patients, and the 
main indications of benefit resulting therefrom are reduction of 
the fever, improvement of appetite and the induction of sleep. 

The air, however, may be modified in composition or in tempera- 
ture. Inhalation is the most common and successful method of 
applying it — -when modified in composition— to the human body. 
The methods in use are as follows: (1) Inhalation of gases, 
as oxygen and nitrous oxide.. The dyspnoea and cyanosis of 
pneumonia, capillary bronchitis, heart failure, &c, are much 
relieved by the inhalation of oxygen; and nitrous oxide is 
largely used as an anaesthetic in minor operations. (2) Certain 
liquids are used as anaesthetics, which volatilize at low tempera- 
tures, as chloroform and ether. (3) Mercury and sulphur, both 
of which require heat for volatilization, are very largely used. 
In a mercurial or sulphur bath, the patient, enveloped in a 
sheet, sits on a chair beneath which a spirit lamp is placed to 
vaporize the drug, the best results being obtained when the 
atmosphere is surcharged with steam at the same time. The 
vapour envelops the patient and is absorbed by the skin. This 
method is extensively used in the treatment of syphilis, and also 
for scabies and other parasitic affections of the skin. (4) Moist 
inhalations are rather losing repute in the light of modern 



AERTSZEN— AESCHINES 



271 



investigations, which tend to show that nothing lower than the 
larger bronchial tubes is affected. Complicated apparatus has 
been devised for the application, although a wide-mouthed jug 
filled with boiling water, into which the drug is thrown, is almost 
equally efficacious. 

Artificial atmospheres may be made for invalids by respirators 
which cover the mouth and nose, the air being drawn through 
tow or sponge, on which is sprinkled the disinfectant to be used. 
This is most valuable in the intensely offensive breath of some 
cases of bronchiectasis. 

The air may be modified as to temperature. Cold air at 
32-33 F. has been used in chronic catarrhal conditions of the 
lungs, with the result that cough diminishes, the pulse becomes 
fuller and slower and the general condition improves. The 
more recent observations of Pasquale di Tullio go far to 
show that this may be immensely valuable in the treatment 
of haemoptysis. The inspiration of superheated dry air has 
been the subject of much investigation, but with very doubtful 
results. 

Hot air applied to the skin is more noteworthy in its therapeutic 
effects. If a current of hot air is directed upon healthy skin, the 
latter becomes pale and contracts in consequence of vaso-con- 
striction. But if it is directed on a patch of diseased skin, as 
in lupus, an inflammatory reaction is set up and the diseased 
part begins to undergo necrosis. This fact has been used with 
good results in hipus, otorrhoea, rhinitis and other nasal and 
laryngeal troubles. 

Lastly the air may be either compressed or rarefied. The 
physiological effects of compressed air were first studied in 
diving-bells, and more recently in caissons. Caisson workers at 
first enjoy increased strength, vigour and appetite; later, how- 
ever, the opposite effect is produced and intense debility super- 
venes. In addition, caisson workers suffer from a series of 
troubles which are known as accidents of decompression. (See 
Caisson Disease.) But, therapeutically, compressed air has 
been utilized by means of pneumatic chambers large enough to 
hold one or more adults at the time, in which the pressure of 
the atmosphere can be exactly regulated. This form of treat- 
ment has been found of much value in the treatment of emphy- 
sema, early pulmonary tuberculosis (not in the presence of 
persistent high temperature, haemorrhage, softening or suppura- 
tion), delayed absorption of pleural effusions, heart disease, 
anaemia and chlorosis. But compressed air is contra-indicated 
in advanced tubercle, fever, and in diseases of kidneys, liver or 
intestines. 

Rarefied air was used as long ago as 1835, by V. T. Junod, 
who utilized it for local application by inventing the Junod Boot. 
By means of this the blood could be drawn into any part to which 
it was applied, the vessels of which became gorged with blood at 
the expense of internal organs. More recently this method of 
treatment has undergone far-reaching developments and is 
known as the passive hyperaemic treatment. 

There are also various forms of apparatus by means of which 
air at greater or lesser pressures may be drawn into the lungs, 
and for the performance of lung gymnastics of various kinds. 
Mr Ketchum of the United States has invented one which 
is much used. A committee of the Brompton Hospital, 
London, investigating its capabilities, decided that its use 
brought about (1) an increase of chest circumference, and (2) 
in cases of consolidation of the lung a diminution in the area 
of dulness. 

AERTSZEN (or Aartsen), PIETER (1507-1573), called 
"Long Peter " on account of his height, Dutch historical 
painter, was born and died at Amsterdam. When a youth he 
distinguished himself by painting homely scenes, in which he 
reproduced articles of furniture, cooking utensils, &c, with 
marvellous fidelity, but he afterwards cultivated historical 
painting. Several of his best works — altar-pieces in various 
churches — were destroyed in the religious wars of the Nether- 
lands. An excellent specimen of his style on a small scale, a 
picture of the crucifixion, may be seen in the Antwerp Museum. 
Aertszen was a member of the Academy of St Luke, in whose 



books he is entered as Langhe Peter, schilder. Three of his sons 
attained to some note as painters. 

AESCHINES (389-314 B.C.), Greek statesman and orator, was 
born at Athens. The statements as to his parentage and early 
life are conflicting; but it seems probable that his parents, 
though poor, were respectable. After assisting his father in his 
school, he tried his hand at acting with indifferent success, 
served with distinction in the army, and held several clerkships, 
amongst them the office of clerk to the B ou le. The fall of 
Olynthus (348) brought Aeschines into the political arena, and 
he was sent on an embassy to rouse the Peloponnesus against 
Philip. In 347 he was a member of the peace embassy to Philip 
of Macedon, who seems to have won him over entirely to his side. 
His dilatoriness during the second embassy (346) sent to ratify 
the terms of peace led to his accusation by Demosthenes and 
Timarchus on a charge of high treason, but he was acquitted 
as the result of a powerful speech, in which he showed that his 
accuser Timarchus had, by his immoral conduct, forfeited the 
right to speak before the people. In 343 the attack was renewed 
by Demosthenes in his speech On the False Embassy; Aeschines 
replied in a speech with the same title and was again acquitted. 
In 339, as one of the Athenian deputies {pylagorae) in the Amphi- 
ctyonic Council, he made a speech which brought about the 
Sacred War. By way of revenge, Aeschines endeavoured to fix 
the blame for these disasters upon Demosthenes. In 336, when 
Ctesiphon proposed that his friend Demosthenes should be 
rewarded with a golden crown for his distinguished services to 
the state, he was accused by Aeschines of having violated the 
law in bringing forward the motion. The matter remained in 
abeyance till 330, when the two rivals delivered their speeches 
Against Ctesiphon and On the Crown. The result was a complete 
victory for Demosthenes. Aeschines went into voluntary exile 
at Rhodes, where he opened a school of rhetoric. He afterwards 
removed to Samos, where he died in the seventy-fifth year of 
his age. His three speeches, called by the ancients " the Three 
Graces," rank next to those of Demosthenes. Photius knew of 
nine letters by him which he called the Nine Muses; the twelve 
published under his name (Hercher, Epistolographi Graeci) are 
not genuine. y . 

Ancient Authorities. — Demosthenes, De Corona and De Falsa 
Legatione; Aeschines, De Falsa Legatione and In Ctesiphontem;' 
Lives by Plutarch, Philostratus and Libanius; the Exegesis of 
Apollonius. Editions. — Benseler (1 855-1 860) (trans, and notes), 
Weidner (1872), Blass (1896); Against Ctesiphon, Weidner (1872), 
(l878),G.A.and W.H. Simcox(l866),Drake (i872),Richardson(i889), 
Gwatkin and Shuckburgh (1890). English Translations. — Leland 
(1771), Biddle (1881), and others. See also Stechow, Aeschinis Ora- 
toris vita (1841); Marchand, Charakteristik des Redners Aschines 
(1876) ; Castets, Eschine, VOrateur (1875) ; for the political problems 
see histories of Greece, esp. A. Holm, vol. iii. (Eng. trans., 1896) ; 
A. Schafer, Demosth. und seine Zeit (Leipzig, 1856-1858); also 
Demosthenes. 

AESCHINES (5th century B.C.), an Athenian philosopher. 
According to some accounts he was the son of a sausage-maker, 
but others say that his father was Lysanias (Diog. Laert. ii. 60; 
Suidas, s.v.). He was an intimate friend of Socrates, who is 
reported to have said that the sausage-maker's son alone knew 
how to honour him. Diogenes Laertius preserves a tradition 
that it was he, not Crito, who offered to help Socrates to escape 
from prison. He was always a poor man, and Socrates advised 
him " to borrow from himself, by diminishing his expenditure." 
He started a perfumery shop in Athens on borrowed capital, 
became bankrupt and retired to the Syracusan court, where he 
was well received by Aristippus. According to Diog. Laert. (ii. 
61), Plato, then at Syracuse, pointedly ignored Aeschines, but 
this does not agree with Plutarch, De adulatore et amico (c. 26). 
On the expulsion of the younger Dionysius, he returned to 
Athens, and, finding it impossible to profess philosophy publicly 
owing to the contempt of Plato and Aristotle, was compelled to 
teach privately. He wrote also forensic speeches; Phrynichus, 
in Photius, ranks him amongst the best orators, and mentions 
his orations as the standard of the pure Attic style. Hermogenes 
also spoke highly of him (Uepl l8eS>v). He wrote several philo- 
sophical dialogues: (1) Concerning virtue, whether it can be 



272 



AESCHYLUS 



taught; (2) Eryxias, or Erasistratus; concerning riches, whether 
they are good; (3) Axiochus: concerning death, whether it is to 
be feared, — but those extant on the several subjects are not 
genuine remains. J. le Clerc has given a Latin translation of 
them, with notes and several dissertations, entitled Silvae 
Philologicae, and they have been edited by S. N. Fischer (Leipzig, 
1786), and K. F. Hermann, De Aeschin. Socrat. relig. (Gott. 
1850). The genuine dialogues appear to have been marked by 
the Socratic irony; an amusing passage is quoted by Cicero in 
the De inventione (i. 31). 

See Hirzel, Der Dialog, i. 129-140; T. Gomperz, Greek Thinkers, 
vol. iii. p. 342 (Eng. trans. G. 6. Berry, London, 1905). 

AESCHYLUS (525-456 B.C.), Greek poet, the first of the 
only three Attic Tragedians of whose work entire plays survive, 
and in a very real sense (as we shall see) the founder of the Greek 
drama, was born at Eleusis in the year 525 B.C. His father, 
Euphorion, belonged to the " Eupatridae " or old nobility of 
Athens, as we know on the authority of the short Life of the 
Life P oet Si ven m tne Medicean Manuscript (see note on 

"authorities" at the end). According to the same 
tradition he took part as a soldier in the great struggle of Greece 
against Persia; and was present at the battles of Marathon, 
Artemisium, Salamis and Plataea, in the years 490-479. At least 
one of his brothers, Cynaegirus, fought with him at Marathon, 
and was killed in attempting a conspicuous act of bravery; 
and the brothers' portraits found a place in the national picture 
of the battle which the Athenians set up as a memorial in 
the Stoa Poecile (or "Pictured Porch") at Athens. 

The vigour and loftiness of tone which mark Aeschylus' 
poetic work was not only due, we may be sure, to his native 
genius and gifts, powerful as they were, but were partly in- 
spired by the personal share he took in the great actions of a 
heroic national uprising. In the same way, the poet's brooding 
thoughtfulness on deep questions — the power of the gods, their 
dealings with man, the dark mysteries of fate, the future life in 
Hades — though largely due to his turn of mind and temperament, 
was doubtless connected with the place where his childhood 
was passed. Eleusis was the centre of the most famous worship 
of Demeter, with its processions, its ceremonies, its mysteries, 
its impressive spectacles and nocturnal rites; and these were 
intimately connected with the Greek beliefs about the human 
soul, and the underworld. 

His dramatic career began early, and was continued for more 
than forty years. In 499, his 26th year, he first exhibited at 
Athens; and his last work, acted during his lifetime at Athens, 
was the trilogy of the Oresteia, exhibited in 458. The total 
number of his plays is stated by Suidas to have been ninety; 
and the seven extant plays, with the dramas named or nameable 
which survive only in fragments, amount to over eighty, so that 
Suidas' figure is probably based on reliable tradition. It is well 
known that in the 5th century each exhibitor at the tragic con- 
tests produced four plays; and Aeschylus must therefore have 
competed (between 499 and 458) more than twenty times, or once 
in two years. His first victory is recorded in 484, fifteen years 
after his earliest appearance on the stage; but in the remaining 
twenty-six years of his dramatic activity at Athens he was 
successful at least twelve times. This clearly shows that he was 
the most commanding figure among the tragedians of 500-458; 
and for more than half that time was usually the victor in the 
contests. Perhaps the most striking evidence of his exceptional 
position among his contemporaries is the well-known decree 
passed shortly after his death that whosoever desired to exhibit 
a play of Aeschylus should " receive a chorus," i.e. be officially 
allowed to produce the drama at the Dionysia. The existence 
of this decree, mentioned in the Life, is strongly confirmed by 
two passages in Aristophanes: first in the prologue of the 
Acharnians (which was acted in 425, thirty-one years after the 
poet's death), where the citizen, grumbling about his griefs and 
troubles, relates his great disappointment, when he took his seat 
in the theatre " expecting Aeschylus," to find that when the 
play came on it was Theognis; and secondly in a scene of the 
Frogs (acted 405 B.C.), where the throne of poetry is contested 



in Hades between Aeschylus and Euripides, the former com- 
plains {Fr. 866) that " the battle is not fair, because my own 
poetry has not died with me, while Euripides' has died, and 
therefore he will have it with him to recite " — a clear reference, as 
the scholiast points out, to the continued production at Athens 
of Aeschylus' plays after his death. 

Apart from fables, guesses and blunders, of which a word is 
said below, the only other incidents recorded of the poet's life 
that deserve mention are connected with his Sicilian visits, and 
the charge preferred against him of revealing the " secrets of 
Demeter." This tale is briefly mentioned by Aristotle (Eth. iii. 2), 
and a late commentator (Eustratius, i2th^ century) quotes from 
one Heraclides Pontius the version which may be briefly given 
as follows: — 

The poet was acting a part in one of his own plays, where there 
was a reference to Demeter. The audience suspected him of 
revealing the inviolable secrets, and rose in fury; the poet fled 
to the altar of Dionysus in the orchestra and so saved his life 
for the moment; for even an angry Athenian crowd respected 
the inviolable sanctuary. He was afterwards charged with the 
crime before the Areopagus; and his plea " that he did not 
know that what he said was secret " was accepted by the court 
and secured his acquittal. The commentator adds that the 
prowess of the poet (and his brother) at Marathon was the real 
cause of the leniency of his judges. The story was afterwards 
developed, and embellished by additions; but in the above 
shape it dates back to the 4th century; and as the main fact 
seems accepted by Aristotle, it is probably authentic. 

As to his foreign travel, the suggestion has been made that 
certain descriptions in the Persae, and the known facts that he 
wrote a trilogy on the story of the Thracian king Lycurgus, 
persecutor of Dionysus, seem to point to his having a special 
knowledge of Thrace, which makes it likely that he had visited 
it. This, however, remains at best a conjecture. For his repeated 
visits to Sicily, on the other hand, there is conclusive ancient 
evidence. Hiero the First, tyrant of Syracuse, who reigned 
about twelve years (478-467), and amongst other efforts after 
magnificence invited to his court famous poets and men of letters, 
had founded a new town, Aetna, on the site of Catana which he 
captured, expelling the inhabitants. Among his guests were 
Aeschylus, Pindar, Bacchylides and Simonides. About 476 
Aeschylus; was entertained by him, and at his request wrote 
and exhibited a play called The Women of Aetna in honour of 
the new town. He paid a second visit about 472, the year in 
which he had produced the Persae at Athens; and the play is 
said to have been repeated at Syracuse at his patron's request. 
Hiero died in 467, the year of the Seven against Thebes; but 
after 458, when the Oresteia was exhibited at Athens, we find 
the poet again in Sicily for the last time. In 456 he died, and 
was buried at Gela; and on his tomb was placed an epitaph in 
two elegiac couplets saying: " Beneath this stone lies Aeschylus, 
son of Euphorion, the Athenian, who perished in the wheat- 
bearing land of Gela; of his noble prowess the grove of Marathon 
can speak, or the long-haired Persian who knows it well." The 
authorship of this epitaph is uncertain, as the Life says it was 
inscribed on his grave by the people of Gela, while Athenaeus 
and Pausanias attribute it to Aeschylus. Probably most people 
would agree that only the poet himself could have praised the 
soldier and kept silence about the poetry. 

Of the marvellous traditions which gathered round his name 
little need be said. Pausanias' tale, how Dionysus appeared to 
the poet when a boy, asleep in his father's vineyard, and bade 
him write a tragedy — or the account in the Life, how he was 
killed by an eagle letting fall on his head a tortoise whose shell 
the bird was unable to crack — clearly belong to the same class 
of legends as the story that Plato was son of Apollo, and that 
a swarm of bees settled upon his infant lips as he lay in his 
mother's arms. Less supernatural, but hardly more historical, 
is the statement in the Life that the poet left Athens for Sicily 
in consequence of his defeat in the dramatic contest of 468 by 
Sophocles; or the alternative story of the same authority that 
the cause of his chagrin was that Simonides' elegy on the heroes 



AESCHYLUS 



273 



Work. 



slain at Marathon was preferred to his own. Apart from the 
inherent improbability of such pettiness in such a man, neither 
story fits the facts; for in 467, the next year after Sophocles' 
success, we know that Aeschylus won the prize of tragedy with 
the Sepiem; and the Marathon elegy must have been written in 
490, fourteen years before his first visit to Sicily. 

In passing from Aeschylus' life to his work, we have obviously 
far more trustworthy data, in the seven extant plays (with 
the fragments of more than seventy others), and par- 
ticularly in the invaluable help of Aristotle's Poetics. 
The real importance of our poet in the development of the drama 
(see Drama: Greek) as compared with any of his three or four 
known predecessors — who are at best hardly more than names 
to us — is shown by the fact that Aristotle, in his brief review of 
the rise of tragedy {Poet. iv. 13), names no one before Aeschy- 
lus. He recognizes, it is true, a long process of growth, with 
several stages, from the dithyramb to the drama; and it is not 
difficult to see what these stages were. , The first step was the 
addition to the old choric song of an interlude spoken, and in 
early days improvised, by the leader of the chorus {Poet. iv. 
12). The next was the introduction of an actor (iwoKptr^s or 
" answerer "), to reply to the leader; and thus we get dialogue 
added to recitation. The " answerer " was at first the poet 
himself (Ar. Rhet. iii. 1). This change is traditionally attributed 
to Thespis (536 B.C.), who is, however, not mentioned by Aristotle. 
The mask, to enable the actor to assume different parts, by 
whomsoever invented, was in regular use before Aeschylus' day. 
The third change was the enlarged range of subjects. The lyric 
dithyramb-tales were necessarily about Dionysus, and the inter- 
ludes had, of course, to follow suit. Nothing in the world so 
tenaciously resists innovation as religious ceremony; ^nd it is 
interesting to learn that the Athenian populace (then, as ever, 
eager for " some new thing ") nevertheless opposed at first the 
introduction of other tales. But the innovators won; or other- 
wise there would have been no Attic drama. 

In this way, then, to the original lyric song and dances in 
honour of Dionysus was added a spoken (but still metrical) 
interlude by the chorus-leader, and later a dialogue with one 
actor (at first the poet), whom the mask enabled to appear in 
more than one part. 

But everything points to the fact that in the development of 
the drama Aeschylus was the decisive innovator. The two 
things that were important, when the 5th century began, if 
tragedy was to realize its possibilities, were (1) the disentangle- 
ment of the dialogue from its position as an interlude in an 
artistic and religious pageant that was primarily lyric; and (2) 
its general elevation of tone. Aeschylus, as we know on the 
express authority of Aristotle {Poet. iv. 13), achieved the first 
by the introduction of the second actor; and though he did 
not begin the second, he gave it the decisive impulse and con- 
summation by the overwhelming effect of his serious thought, 
the stately splendour of his style, his high dramatic purpose, 
and the artistic grandeur and impressiveness of the construction 
and presentment of his tragedies. 

As to the importance of the second actor no argument is 
needed. The essence of a play is dialogue; and a colloquy 
between the coryphaeus and a messenger (or, by aid of the mask, 
a series of messengers), as must have been the case when Aeschy- 
lus began, is in reality not dialogue in the dramatic sense at all, 
but rather narrative. The discussion, the persuasion, the in- 
struction, the pleading, the contention — in short, the interacting 
personal influences of different characters on each other— are 
indispensable to anything that can be called a play, as we 
understand the word; and, without two "personae dramatis" 
at the least, the drama in the strict sense is clearly impossible. 
The number of actors was afterwards increased; but to Aeschylus 
are due the perception and the adoption of the essential step; 
and therefore, as was said above, he deserves in a very real sense 
to be called the founder of Athenian tragedy. 

Of the seven extant plays, Supplices, Persae, Sepiem contra 
Thebas, Prometheus, Agamemnon, Choephoroe and Eumenides, five 
can fortunately be dated with certainty, as the archon's name 



is preserved in the Arguments; and the other two approximately. 
The dates rest, in the last resort, on the diSaaicaXiai, or the official 
records of the contests, of which we know that Aristotle (and 
others) compiled catalogues; and some actual fragments have 
been recovered. The order of the plays is probably that given 
above; and certainly the Persae was acted in 472, Sepiem in 
467, and the last three, the trilogy, in 458. The Supplices is 
generally, though not unanimously, regarded as the oldest; 
and the best authorities tend to place it not far from 490. The 
early date is strongly confirmed by three things: the extreme 
simplicity of the plot, the choric (instead of dramatic) opening, 
and the fact that the percentage of lyric passages is 54, or the 
highest of all the seven plays. The chief doubt is in regard to 
Prometheus, which is variously placed by good authorities; but 
the very low percentage of lyrics (only 27, or roughly a quarter 
of the whole), and still more the strong characterization, a 
marked advance on anything in the first three plays, point to 
its being later than any except the trilogy, and suggest a date 
somewhere about 460, or perhaps a little earlier. A few com- 
ments on the extant plays will help to indicate the main points 
of Aeschylus' work. 

Supplices. — The exceptional interest of the Supplices is due to 
its date. Being nearly twenty years earlier than any other 
extant play, it furnishes evidence of a stage in the evolution of 
Attic drama which would otherwise have been unrepresented. 
Genius, as Patin says, is a " puissance libre," and none more so 
than that of Aeschylus; but with all allowance for the " un- 
controlled power " of this poet, we may feel confident that we 
have in the Supplices something resembling in general structure 
the lost works of Choerilus, Phrynichus, Pratinas and the 6th- 
century pioneers of drama. 

The plot is briefly as follows: the fifty daughters of Danaus 
(who are the chorus), betrothed by the fiat of Aegyptus (their 
father's brother) to his fifty sons, flee with Danaus to Argos, 
to escape the marriage which they abhor. They claim the pro- 
tection of the Argive king, Pelasgus, who is kind but timid; and 
he (by a pleasing anachronism) refers the matter to the people, 
who agree to protect the fugitives. The pursuing fleet of suitors 
is seen approaching;, the herald arrives (with a company of 
followers), blusters, threatens, orders off the cowering Danaids 
to the ships and finally attempts to drag them away. Pelasgus 
interposes with a force, drives off the Egyptians and saves the 
suppliants. Danaus urges them to prayer, thanksgiving and 
maidenly modesty, and the grateful chorus pass away to the 
shelter offered by their protectors. 

It is clear that we have here the drama in its nascent stage, 
just developing out of the lyric pageant from which it sprang. 
The interest still centres round the chorus, who are in fact the 
" protagonists " of the play. Character and plot — the two 
essentials of drama, in the view of all critics from Aristotle 
downwards — are both here rudimentary. There are some 
fluctuations of hope and fear; but the play is a single situation. 
The stages are: the appeal; the hesitation of the king, the re- 
solve of the people; the defeat of insolent violence; and the 
rescue. It should not be forgotten, indeed, that the play is one 
of a trilogy — an act, therefore, rather than a complete drama. 
But we have only to compare it with those later plays of which 
the same is true, to see the difference. Even in a trilogy, each 
play is a complete whole in itself, though also a portion of a 
larger whole. 

Persae. — The next play that has survived is the Persae, which 
has again a special interest, viz. that it is the only extant Greek 
historical drama. We know that Aeschylus' predecessor, Phryni- 
chus, had already twice tried this experiment, with the Capture 
of Miletus and the Phoenician Women; that the latter play 
dealt with the same subject as the Persae, and the handling of 
its opening scene was imitated by the younger poet. The plot 
of the Persae is still severely simple, though more developed 
than that of the Suppliants. The opening is still lyric, and the 
first quarter of the play brings out, by song and speech, the 
anxiety of the people and queen as to the fate of Xerxes' huge 
army. Then comes the messenger with the news of Salami's, 



274 



AESCHYLUS 



including a description of the sea-fight itself which can only 
be called magnificent. We realize what it must have been for 
the vast audience — 30,000, according to Plato (Symp. 175 e) — 
to hear, eight years only after the event, from the supreme poet 
of Athens, who was himself a distinguished actor in the war, 
this thrilling narrative of the great battle. But this reflexion at 
once suggests another; it is not a tragedy in the true Greek 
sense, according to the practice of the 5th-century poets. It 
may be called in one point of view a tragedy, since the scene is 
laid in Persia, and the drama forcibly depicts the downfall of 
the Persian pride. But its real aim is not the "pity and terror" 
of the developed drama; it is the triumphant glorification of 
Athens, the exultation of the whole nation gathered in one place, 
over the ruin of their foe. This is best shown by the praise of 
Aeschylus' great admirer and defender Aristophanes, who (Frogs, 
1026-1027) puts into the poet's mouth the boast that in the 
Persae he had " glorified a noble exploit, and taught men to be 
eager to conquer their foe." 

Thus, both as an historic drama and in its real effect, the 
Persae was an experiment; and, as far as we know, the experi- 
ment was not repeated either by the author or his successors. 
One further point may be noted. Aeschylus always has a taste 
for the unseen and the supernatural; and one effective incident 
here is the raising of Darius's ghost, and his prophecy of the 
disastrous battle of Plataea. But in the ghost's revelations 
there is a mixture of audacity and naivete, characteristic at 
once of the poet and the early youth of the drama. The dead 
Darius prophesies Plataea, but has not heard of Salamis; he 
gives a brief (and inaccurate) list of the Persian kings, which 
the queen and chorus, whom he addresses, presumably know; 
and his only practical suggestion, that the Persians should not 
again invade Greece, seems attainable without the aid of super- 
human foresight. 

Septem contra Thebas. — Five years later came the Theban 
Tragedy. It is not only, as Aristophanes says (Frogs, 1024), 
" a play full of the martial spirit," but is (like the Supplices) 
one of a connected series, dealing with the evil fate of the Theban 
House. But instead of being three acts of a single story like the 
Supplices, these three plays trace the fate through three genera- 
tions, Laius, Oedipus and the two sons who die by each other's 
hands in the fight for the Theban sovereignty. This family fate, 
where one evil deed leads to another after many years, is a larger 
conception, strikingly suited to Aeschylus' genius, and con- 
stitutes a notable stage in the development of the Aeschylean 
drama. And just as here we have the tragedy of the Theban 
house, so in the last extant work, the Oresteia, the poet traces 
the tragedy of the Pelopid family, from Agamemnon's first sin 
to Orestes' vengeance and purification. And the names of several 
lost plays point to similar handling of the tragic trilogy. 

The Seven against Thebes is the last play of its series; and 
again the plot is severely simple, not only in outline, but in detail. 
Father and grandfather have both perished miserably; and the 
two princes have quarrelled, both claiming the kingdom. Eteo- 
cles has driven out Polynices, who fled to Argos, gathered a host 
under seven leaders (himself being one) , and when the play opens 
has begun the siege of his own city. The king appears, warns 
the people, chides the clamour of women,appoints seven Thebans, 
including himself, to defend the seven gates, departs to his post, 
meets his brother in battle and both are killed. The other six 
chieftains are all slain, and the enemy beaten off. The two dead 
princes are buried by their two sisters, who alone are left of the 
royal house. 

Various signs of the early drama are here manifest. Half the 
play is lyric; there is no complication of plot; the whole action 
is recited by messengers; and the fatality whereby the predicted 
mutual slaughter of the princes is brought about is no accidental 
stroke of destiny, but the choice of the king Eteocles himself. 
On the other hand, the opening is no longer lyric (like the two 
earlier plays) but dramatic; the main scene, where the mes- 
senger reports at length the names of the seven assailants, and 
the king appoints the seven defenders, each man going off in 
silence to his post, must have been an impressive spectacle. 



One novelty should not be overlooked. There is here the firs' t 
passage of kkvoia, or general reflexion of life, which later became 
a regular feature of tragedy. Eteocles muses on the fate which 
involves an innocent ma.n in the company of the wicked so that 
he shares unjustly their deserved fate. The passage (Theb. 
507-608) is interesting; and the whole part of Eteocles shows a 
new effort of the poet to draw character, which may have some- 
thing to do with the rise of Sophocles, who in the year before 
(468) won with his first play, now lost, the prize of tragedy.. 

There remain only the Prometheus and the Oresteia, which 
show such marked advance that (it may almost be said) when we 
think of Aeschylus it is these four plays we have in mind. 

Prometheus. — The Prometheus-trilogy consisted of three plays: 
Prometheus the Fire-bringer, Prometheus Bound, Prometheus 
Unbound. The two last necessarily came in that order; the 
Fire-bringer is probably the first, though recently it has been held 
by some scholars to be the last, of the trilogy. That Prometheus 
sinned against Zeus, by stealing fire from heaven; that he was 
punished by fearful tortures for ages; that he finally was recon- 
ciled to Zeus and set free, — all this was the ancient tale indisput- 
ably. Those who hold the Fire-bringer (Jhjp<j>6pos) to be the final 
play, conjecture that it dealt with the establishment of the 
worship of Prometheus under that title, which is known to have 
existed at Athens. But the other order is on all grounds more 
probable; it keeps the natural sequence — crime, punishment, 
reconciliation, which is also the sequence in the Oresteia. Arid 
if the reconciliation was achieved in the second play, no scheme 
of action sufficing for the third drama seems even plausible. 1 

However that may be, the play that survives is a poem of 
unsurpassed force and impressiveness. Nevertheless, from the 
point of view of the development of drama, there seems at first 
sight little scope in the story for the normal human interest of a 
tragedy, since the actors are all divine, except Io, who is a dis- 
tracted wanderer, victim of Zeus' cruelty; and between the open- 
ing where Prometheus is nailed to the Scythian rock, and the 
close where the earthquake engulfs the rock, the hero and the 
chorus, action in the ordinary sense is ipso facto impossible. This 
is just the opportunity for the poet's bold inventiveness and fine 
imagination. The tortured sufferer is visited by the Oceanic 
Nymphs, who float in, borne by an (imaginary) winged car, to 
console; Oceanus (riding a .griffin, doubtless also imaginary) 
follows, kind but timid, to advise submission; then appears Io, 
victim of Zeus' love and Hera's jealousy, to whom Prometheus 
prophesies her future wanderings and his own fate; lastly 
Hermes, insolent messenger of the gods, who tries in vain to 
extort Prometheus' secret knowledge of the future. Oceanus, 
the well-meaning palavering old mentor, and Hermes, the 
blustering and futile jack-in-office, gods though they be, are 
vigorous, audacious and very human character-sketches; the 
soft entrance of the consoling nymphs is unspeakably beautiful; 
and the prophecy of Io's wanderings is a striking example of 
that new keen interest in the world outside which was felt by the 
Greeks of the 5th century, as it was felt by the Elizabethan 
English in a very similar epoch of national spirit and enterprise 
two thousand years later. Thus, though dramatic action is by 
the nature of the case impossible for the hero,. the visitors provide 
real drama. 

Another important point in the development of tragedy is 
what we may call the " balanced issue." The question in 
Suppliants is the protection of the threatened fugitives; in 
Persae the humiliation of overweening pride. So far the sym- 
pathy of the audience is not doubtful or divided. In- the Septem 
there is an approach to conflict of feeling; the banished brother 
has a personal grievance, though guilty of the impious crime of 
attacking his own country. The sympathy must be for the de- 
fender Eteocles; but it is at least somewhat qualified by his 
injustice to his brother. In Prometheus the issue is more nearly 
1 The Eumenides is quoted as a parallel, because there the estab- 
lishment of this worship at Athens concludes the whole trilogy; 
but it is forgotten that in Eumenides there is much besides— the 
pursuit of Orestes, the refuge at Athens, the trial, the acquittal, the 
conciliation by Athena of the Furies; while here the story would be 
finished before the last play began. 



AESCHYLUS 



*75 



balanced. The hero is both a victim and a rebel. He is punished 
for his benefits to man; but though Zeus is tyrannous and un- 
grateful, the hero's reckless defiance is shocking to Greek feeling. 
As the play goes on, this is subtly and delicately indicated by 
the attitude of the chorus. They enter overflowing with pity. 
They are slowly chilled and alienated by the hero's violence 
and impiety; but they nobly decline, at the last crisis, the mean 
advice of Hermes to desert Prometheus and save themselves; 
and in the final crash they share his fate. 

Oresteia. — The last and greatest work of Aeschylus is the 
Oresteia, which also has the interest of being the only complete 
trilogy preserved to us. It is a three-act drama of family fate, 
like the Oedipus-trilogy; and the acts are the sin, the revenge, 
the reconciliation, as in the Prometheus-trilogy. Again, as in 
Prometheus, the plot, at first sight, is such that the conditions of 
drama seem to exclude much development in character-drawing. 
The gods are everywhere at the root of the action. The inspired 
prophet, Calchas, has demanded the sacrifice of the king's 
daughter Iphigenia, to appease the offended Artemis. The in- 
spired Cassandra, brought in as a spear- won slave from conquered 
Troy, reveals the murderous past of the Pelopid house, and the 
imminent slaughter of the king by his wife. Apollo orders the 
son, Orestes, to avenge his father by killing the murderess, and 
protects him when after the deed he takes sanctuary at Delphi. 
The Erinnyes (" Furies ") pursue him over land and sea; and at 
last Athena gives him shelter at Athens, summons an Athenian 
council to judge his guilt, and when the court is equally divided 
gives her casting vote for mercy. The last act ends with the 
reconciliation of Athena and the Furies; and the latter receive 
a shrine and worship at Athens, and promise favour and pros- 
perity to the great city. The scope for human drama seems 
deliberately restricted, if not closed, by such a story so handled. 
Nevertheless, as a fact, the growth of characterization is, in 
spite of all, not only visible but remarkable. Clytemnestra is 
one of the most powerfully presented characters of the Greek 
drama. Her manly courage, her vindictive and unshaken pur- 
pose, her hardly hidden contempt for her tool and accomplice, 
Aegisthus, her cold scorn for the feebly vacillating elders, and 
her unflinching acceptance (in the second play) of inevitable 
fate, when she faces at last the avowed avenger, are all portrayed 
with matchless force — her very craft being scornfully assumed, 
as needful to her purpose, and contemptuously dropped when 
the purpose is served. And there is one other noticeable point. 
In this trilogy Aeschylus, for the first time, has attempted some 
touches of character in two of the humbler parts, the Watchman 
in Agamemnon, and the Nurse in the Choephoroe. The Watch- 
man opens the play, and the vivid and almost humorous senten- 
tiousness of his language, his dark hints, his pregnant metaphors 
drawn from common speech, at once give a striking touch of 
realism, and form a pointed contrast to the terrible drama that 
impends. A very similar effect is produced at the crisis of the 
Choephoroe by the speech of the Nurse, who coming on a message 
to Aegisthus pours out to the chorus her sorrow at the reported 
death of Orestes and her fond memories of his babyhood — with 
the most homely details; and the most striking realistic touch 
is perhaps the broken structure and almost inconsequent utter- 
ance of the old faithful slave's speech. These two are veritable 
figures drawn from contemporary life; and though both appear 
only once, and are quite unimportant in the drama, the innova- 
tion is most significant, and especially as adopted by Aeschylus. 

It remains to say a word on two more points, the religious ideas 
of Aeschylus and some of the main characteristics of his poetry. 
The religious aspect of the drama in one sense was 
teiisiics. prominent from the first, owing to its evolution from 
the choral celebration of the god Dionysus. But the 
new spirit imported by the genius of Aeschylus into the early 
drama was religious in a profounder meaning of the term. The 
sadness of human lot, the power and mysterious dealings of the 
gods, their terrible and inscrutable wrath and jealousy (0,7a and 
<t>d6voi), their certain vengeance upon sinners, all the more fearful 
il delayed. — such are the poet's constant themes, delivered 
with strange solemnly and impressiveness in the lyric songs, 



especially in the Oresteia. And at times, particularly in the 
Trilogy, in his reference to the divine power of Zeus, he almost 
approaches a stern and sombre monotheism. " One God above 
all, who directs all, who is the cause of all" (Ag. 163, 1485); 
the watchfulness of this Power over human action (363-367), 
especially over the punishment of their sins; and the mysterious 
law whereby sin always begets new sin (Ag. 758-760): — these 
are ideas on which Aeschylus dwells in the Agamemnon with 
peculiar force, in a strain at once lofty and sombre. One specially 
noteworthy point in that play is his explicit repudiation of the 
common Hellenic view that prosperity brings ruin. In other 
places he seems to share the feeling; but here (Ag. 730) he goes 
deeper, and declares that it is not oXfios but always wickedness 
that brings about men's fall. All through there is a recurring 
note of fear in his view of man's destiny, expressed in vivid 
images — the " death that lurks behind the wall " (Ag. 1004), 
the " hidden reef which wrecks the bark, unable to weather 
the headland " (Eum. 561-565). In one remarkable passage of 
the Eumenides (517-525) this fear is extolled as a moral power 
which ought to be enthroned in men's hearts, to deter them 
from impious or violent acts, or from the pride that impels them 
to such sins. 

Of the poetic qualities of Aeschylus' drama and diction, both 
in the lyrics and the dialogue, no adequate account can be 
attempted ; the briefest word must here suffice. He is everywhere 
distinguished by grandeur and power of conception, presentation 
and expression, and most of all in the latest works, the Prome- 
theus and the Trilogy. He is pre-eminent in depicting the slow 
approach of fear, as in the Persae; the imminent horror of 
impending fate, as in the broken cries and visions of Cassandra 
in the Agamemnon (1072-1177), the long lament and prayers to 
the nether powers in the Choephoroe (315-478), and the gradual 
rousing of the slumbering Furies in the Eumenides (117-139). 
The fatal end in these tragedies is foreseen; but the effect is 
due to its measured advance, to the slowly darkening suspense 
which no poet has more powerfully rendered. Again, he is a 
master of contrasts, especially of the Beautiful with the Tragic: 
as when the floating vision of consoling nymphs appears to 
the tortured Prometheus (115-135); or the unmatched lyrics 
which tell (in the Agamemnon, 228-247) °f the death of Iphi- 
genia; or the vision of his lost love that the night brings to 
Menelaus (410-426). And not least noticeable is the extra- 
ordinary range, force and imaginativeness of his diction. One 
example of his lyrics may be given which will illustrate more 
than one of these points. It is taken from the long lament in the 
Septem, sung by the chorus and the two sisters, while following 
the funeral procession of the two princes. These laments may at 
times be wearisome to the modern reader, who does not see, and 
imperfectly imagines, the stately and pathetic spectacle; but 
to the ancient feeling they were as solemn and impressive as 
they were ceremonially indispensable. The solemnity is here 
heightened by the following lines sung by one of the chorus of 
Theban women (Sept. 854-860): — ■ 

Nay, with the wafting gale of your sighs, my sisters, 

Beat on your heads with your hands the stroke as of oars, 

The stroke that passes ever across Acheron, 

Speeding on its way the black-robed sacred bark, — 

The bark Apollo comes not near, 

The bark that is hidden from the sunlight — 

To the shore of darkness that welcomes all ! 
Authorities. — The chief authority for the text is a single MS. at 
Florence, of the early nth century, known as the Medicean or M., 
written by a professional scribe and revised by a contemporary 
scholar, who corrected the copyist's mistakes, added the scholia, the 
arguments and the dramatis personae of three plays (Theb., Agam . 
Eum.), and at the end the Life of Aeschylus and the Catalogue of his 
Dramas. The MS. has also been further corrected by later hands. In 
1896 the Italian Ministry of Public Instruction publishd the MS. in 
photographic facsimile, with an instructive preface by Signor 
Rostagno. Besides M. there are some eight later MSS. (13th to 15th 
century), and numerous copies of the three select plays (Sept., Pen., 
Prom.) which were most read in the later Byzantine period, when 
Greek literature was reduced to gradually diminishing excerpts. 
These later MSS. are of little value or authority. 
_ The editions, from the beginning of the 15th century to the present 
time, are very numerous, and the text has been further continuously 



276 



AESCULAPIUS— AESOP 



improved by isolated suggestions from a host of scholars. The three 
first printed copies (Aldine, 1518; Turnebus and Robortello, 1552) 
give only those parts of Agamemnon found in M., from which MS. 
some leaves were lost; in 1557 the full text was restored by Vettori 
(Victorius) from later MSS. After these four, the chief editions of 
the seven plays were those of Schutz, Porson, Butler, Wellauer, Din- 
dorf, Bothe, Ahrens, Paley, Hermann, Hartung, Weil, Merkel, Kirch- 
hoff and Wecklein. Besides these, over a hundred scholars have 
thrown light on the corruptions or obscurities of the text, by editions 
of separate plays, by emendations, by special studies of the poet's 
work, or in other ways. Among recent writers who have made such 
contributions may be mentioned Wilamowitz-Moellendorf, Enger, 
Conington, Blaydes, Cobet, Meineke, Madvig, Ellis, W. Headlam, 
Davies, Tucker, Verrall and Haigh. The Fragments have been 
edited by Nauck and also by Wecklein. The Aeschylean staging is 
discussed in Albert Miiller's Lehrbuch der griechischen Biihnenalter- 
thiimer; in " DieBiihnedes Aeschylos," by Wilamowitz (Hermes, xxi.) ; 
in Smith's Diet, of Antiquities, art. " Theatrum " (R. C. Jebb) ; in 
Dorpfeld and Reisch (Das griechische Theater), Haigh's Attic Theatre, 
and Gardner and Jevons' Manual of Greek Antiquities. English 
Verse Translations: Agamemnon, Milman and R. Browning; 
Oresteia, Suppliants, Persae, Seven against Thebes, Prometheus Vinc- 
tus, by E. D. A. Morshead; Prometheus, E. B. Browning; the 
whole seven plays, Lewis Campbell. (A. Si.) 

AESCULAPIUS (Gr. 'Ao-kX-otios), the legendary Greek god 
of medicine, the son of Apollo and the nymph Coronis. Tricca 
in Thessaly and Epidaurus in Argolis disputed the honour of his 
birthplace, but an oracle declared in favour of Epidaurus. He 
was educated by the centaur Cheiron, who taught him the art of 
healing and hunting. His skill in curing disease and restoring 
the dead to life aroused the anger of Zeus, who, being afraid that 
he might render all men immortal, slew him with a thunder- 
bolt (Apollodorus iii. 10; Pindar, Phthia, 3; Diod. Sic. iv. 71). 
Homer mentions him as a skilful physician, whose sons, Machaon 
and Podalirius, are the physicians in the Greek camp before Troy 
(Iliad, ii. 731). Temples were erected to Aesculapius in many 
parts of Greece, near healing springs or on high mountains. 
The practice of sleeping (incubalio) in these sanctuaries was very 
common, it being supposed that the god effected cures or pre- 
scribed remedies to the sick in dreams. All who were healed 
offered sacrifice — especially a cock — and hung up votive tablets, 
on which were recorded their names, their diseases and the 
manner in which they had been cured. Many of these votive 
tablets have been discovered in the course of excavations at 
Epidaurus. Here was the god's most famous shrine, and games 
were celebrated in his honour every five years, accompanied by 
solemn processions. Herodas (Mimes, 4) gives a description 
of one of his temples, and of the offerings made to him. His 
worship was introduced into Rome by order of the Sibylline books 
(293 B.C.), to avert a pestilence. The god was fetched from 
Epidaurus in the form of a snake and a temple assigned him on 
the island in the Tiber (Livy x. 47; Ovid, Metam. xv. 622). 
Aesculapius was a favourite subject of ancient artists. He is 
commonly represented standing, dressed in a long cloak, with 
bare breast; his usual attribute is a club-like staff with a serpent 
(the symbol of renovation) coiled round it. He is often accom- 
panied by Telesphorus, the boy genius of healing, and his 
daughter Hygieia, the goddess of health. Votive reliefs repre- 
senting such groups have been found near the temple of Aescu- 
lapius at Athens. The British Museum possesses a beautiful 
head of Aesculapius (or possibly Zeus) from Melos, and the 
Louvre a magnificent statue. 

Authorities. — L. Dyer, The Gods in Greece (1891); Jane E. 
Harrison, Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion (1903); R. Caton, 
Temples and Ritual of A. at Epidaurus and Athens (1900) ; articles in 
Pauly-Wissowa's Real-Encyclopadie, Roscher's Lexikon der Mytho- 
logie; T. Panofka, Asklepios und die Asklepiaden (1846); Alice 
Walton, " The Cult of Asklepios," in Cornell Studies in Classical 
Philology, iii. (New York, 1894); W. H. D. Rouse, Greek Votive 
Offerings (1902). • 

AESERNIA (mod. Isernia), a Samnite town on the road from 
Beneventum to Corfinium, 58 m. to the north-east of the former, 
at the junction of a road going past Venafrum to the Via Latina. 
These routes are all followed by modern railways — the lines to 
Campobasso, Sulmona and Caianello. A Roman colony was 
established there in 263 B.C. It became the headquarters of the 
Italian revolt after the loss of Corfinium, and was only recovered 
by Sulla at the end of the war, in 80 B.C. Remains of its fortifica- 



tions are still preserved — massive cyclopean walls, which serve 
as foundation to the walls of the modern town and of a Roman 
bridge, and the subterranean channel of an aqueduct, cut in 
the rock, and dating from Roman times. 

AESOP (Gr. Mo-uiivos), famous for his Fables, is supposed to 
have lived from about 620 to 560 B.C. The place of his birth is 
uncertain— Thrace, Phrygia, Aethiopia, Samos, Athens and Sardis 
all claiming the honour. We possess little trustworthy informa- 
tion concerning his life, except that he was the slave of Iadmon 
of Samos and met with a violent death at the hands of the in- 
habitants of Delphi. A pestilence that ensued being attributed 
to this crime, the Delphians declared their willingness to make 
compensation, which, in default of a nearer connexion, was 
claimed and received by Iadmon, the grandson of his old master. 
Herodotus, who is our authority for this (ii. 134), does not state 
the cause of his death; various reasons are assigned by later 
writers — his insulting sarcasms, the embezzlement of money 
entrusted to him by Croesus for distribution at Delphi, the theft 
of a silver cup. 

Aesop must have received his freedom from Iadmon, or he 
could not have conducted the public defence of a certain Samian 
demagogue (Aristotle, Rhetoric, ii. 20). According to the story, 
he subsequently lived at the court of Croesus, where he met 
Solon, and dined in the company of the Seven Sages of Greece 
with Periander at Corinth. During the reign of Peisistratus he 
is said to have visited Athens, on which occasion he related the 
fable of The Frogs asking for a King, to dissuade the citizens 
from attempting to exchange Peisistratus for another ruler. 
The popular stories current regarding him are derived from a 
life, or rather romance, prefixed to a book of fables, purporting 
to be his, collected by Maximus Planudes, a monk of the 14th 
century. In this he is described as a monster of ugliness and 
deformity, as he is also represented in a well-known marble 
figure in the Villa Albani at Rome. That this life, however, 
was in existence- a century before Planudes, appears from a 
13th-century MS. of it found at Florence. In Plutarch's Sym- 
posium of the Seven Sages, at which Aesop is a guest, there are 
many jests on his original servile condition, but nothing deroga- 
tory is said about his personal appearance. We are further 
told that the Athenians erected in his honour a noble statue by 
the- famous sculptor Lysippus, which furnishes a strong argument 
against the fiction of his deformity. Lastly, the obscurity in 
which the history of Aesop is involved has induced some scholars 
to deny his existence altogether. 

It is probable that Aesop did not commit his fables to writing; 
Aristophanes (Wasps, 1259) represents Philocleon as having 
learnt the " absurdities " of Aesop from conversation at banquets, 
and Socrates whiles away his time in prison by turning some of 
Aesop's fables " which he knew " into verse (Plato, Phaedo, 
61 b). Demetrius of Phalerum (345-283 B.C.) made a collection 
in ten books, probably in prose (Abyuv Ai<ruTtia>v avvayuyai) 
for the use of orators, which has been lost. Next appeared an 
edition in elegiac verse, often cited by Suidas, but the author's 
name is unknown. Babrius, according to Crusius, a Roman and 
tutor to the son of Alexander Severus, turned the fables into 
choliambics in the earlier part of the 3rd century a.d. The 
most celebrated of the Latin adapters is Phaedrus, a freedman of 
Augustus. Avianus (of uncertain date, perhaps the 4th century) 
translated 42 of the fables into Latin elegiacs. The collections 
which we possess under the name of Aesop's Fables are late 
renderings of Babrius's version or Upoyvuvaa iiara, rhetorical 
exercises of varying age and merit. . Syntipas translated Babrius 
into Syriac, and Andreopulos put the Syriac back again into 
Greek. Ignatius Diaconus, in the 9th century, made a version of 
5 3 fables in choliambic tetrameters. Stories from Oriental sources 
were added, and from these collections Maximus Planudes 
made and edited the collection which has come down to us under 
the name of Aesop, and from which the popular fables of modern 
Europe have been derived. 

For further information see the article Fable; Bentley, Dissert- 
ation on the Fables of Aesop; Du Meril, Poesies inedites du moyen 
dge (1854) ; J. Jacobs, The Fables of Aesop (1889) : i. The history of 



AESOPUS— AESTHETICS 



277 



the Aesopic fable; ii. The Fables of Aesop, as first printed by 
William Caxton, 1484, from his French translation; Hervieux, Les 
Fabulistes Latins (1893-1899). 

Before any Greek text appeared, a Latin translation of 100 
Fabulae Aesopicae by an Italian scholar named Ranuzio (Renutius) 
was published at Rome, 1476. About 1480 the collection of 
Planudes was brought out at Milan by Buono Accorso (Accursius) , 
together with Ranuzio's translation. This edition, which contained 
144 fables, was frequently reprinted and additions made from time 
to time from various MSS. — the Heidelberg (Palatine), Florentine, 
Vatican and Augsburg — by Stephanus (1547), Nevelet (1610), 
Hudson (1718), Hauptmann (1741), Furia (1810), Coray (1810), 
Schneider (1812) and others. A critical edition of all the previously 
known fables, prepared by Carl von Halm from the collections of 
Furia, Coray and Schneider, was published in the Teubner series of 
Greek and Latin texts. A Fabularum Aesopicarum sylloge (233 in 
number) from a Paris MS., with critical notes by Sternbach, appeared 
in a Cracow University publication, Rozprawy akademii umiejet- 
nosci (1894). 

AESOPUS, a Greek historian who wrote a history of Alexander 
the Great, a Latin translation of which, by Julius Valerius, was 
discovered by Mai in 1816. 

AESOPUS, CLODIUS, the most eminent Roman tragedian, 
flourished during the time of Cicero, but the dates of his birth 
and death are not known. The name seems to show that he was 
a freedman of some member of the Clodian gens. Cicero was on 
friendly terms with both him and Roscius, the equally distin- 
guished comedian, and did not disdain to profit by their instruc- 
tion. Plutarch '{Cicero, 5) mentions it as reported of Aesopus, 
that, while representing Atreus deliberating how he should 
revenge himself on Thyestes, the actor forgot himself so far in 
the heat of action that with his truncheon he struck and killed 
one of the servants crossing the stage. Aesopus made a last 
appearance in 55 B.C. — when Cicero tells us that he was advanced 
in years — on the occasion of the splendid games given "by Pompey 
at the dedication of his theatre. In spite of his somewhat ex- 
travagant living, he left an ample fortune to his spendthrift son, 
who did his best to squander it as soon as possible. Horace 
(Sat. iii. 3. 239) mentions his taking a pearl from the ear-drop of 
Caecilia Metella and dissolving it in vinegar, that he might have - 
the satisfaction of swallowing eight thousand pounds' worth at a 
draught. 

Cicero, De Divinatione, i. 37; pro Sestio, 56, 58; Quint., Instit- 
xi. 3, in ; Macrobius, Sat. iii. 14. 

AESTHETICS, a branch of study variously denned as the 
philosophy or science of the beautiful, of taste or of the fine arts. 
The name is something of an accident. In its original 
Pre, 'd'»'i Greek form (aicdrjTtKos) it means what has to do with 
J^_ * sense-perception as a source of knowledge; and this 
is still its meaning in Kant's philosophy (" Transcen- 
dental Aesthetic "). Its limitation to that function of sensuous 
perception which we know as the contemplative enjoyment of 
beauty is due to A. G. Baumgarten. Although the subject does 
not readily lend itself to precise definition at the outset, we may 
indicate its scope and aim, as understood by recent writers, by 
saying that it deals successively with one great department of 
human experience, viz. the pleasurable activities of pure con- 
templation. By pure contemplation is here understood that 
manner of regarding objects of sense-perception, and more 
particularly sights and sounds, which is entirely motived by the 
pleasure of the act itself. The term " object " means whatever 
can be perceived through one of the senses, e.g. a flower, a land- 
scape, the flight of a bird, a sequence of tones. The contemplation 
may be immediate when (as mostly happens) the object is present 
to sense; or it may be mediate, when as in reading poetry we 
dwell on images of objects of sense. Whenever we become 
interested in an object merely as presented for our contemplation 
our whole state of mind may be described as an aesthetic atti- 
tude, and our experience as an aesthetic experience. Other 
expressions such as the pleasure of taste, the enjoyment and 
appreciation of beauty (in the larger sense of this term), will 
serve less precisely to mark off this department of experience. 

Aesthetic experience is differentiated from other kinds of 
experience by a number of characteristics. We commonly speak 
of it as enjoyment, as an exercise and cultivation of feeling. 
The appreciation of beauty is pervaded and sustained by pleas- 



urable feeling. In aesthetic enjoyment our capacities of feel- 
ing attain their fullest and most perfect development. Yet, as 
its dependence on a quiet attitude of contemplation 
might tell us, aesthetic experience is characterized by Oifferen- 
a certain degree of calmness and moderation of feeling. aesthetic 
Even when we are moved by a tragedy our feeling is expert- 
comparatively restrained. A rare exhibition of beauty ence - 
may thrill the soul for a moment, yet in general the J^ r j£i cs 
enjoyment of it is far removed from the excitement as feeling. 
of passion. On the other hand, aesthetic pleasure 
is pure enjoyment. Even when a disagreeable element is 
present, as in a musical dissonance or in the suffering of 
a tragic hero, it contributes to a higher measure of enjoy- 
ment. It is, moreover, free from the painful elements of 
craving, fatigue, conflict, anxiety and disappointment, which 
are apt to accompany other kinds of enjoyment; such as 
the satisfaction of the appetites and other needs. To this 
purity of aesthetic pleasure must be added its refinement, 
winch implies not merely a certain remoteness from the bodily 
needs, but the effect of a union of sense and mind in giving 
amplitude as well as delicacy to our enjoyment of beauty. As 
the region of most pure and refined feeling, aesthetic Marked 
experience is clearly marked off from practical life, with off from 
its urgent desires and the rest. In aesthetic contempla- practical 
tion desire and will as a whole are almost dormant. acttYtt yt 
This detachment from the daily life of practical needs and aims 
is brought out in Kant's postulate that aesthetic enjoyment 
must be disinterested ("ohne Interesse"), that when we regard 
an object aesthetically we are not in the least concerned with 
its practical significance and value: one cannot, for example, 
at the same moment aesthetically enjoy looking at a also from 
painting and desire to be its possessor. In like manner, Intel- 
even if less apparently, aesthetic contemplation is lectuat 
marked off from the arduous mental work which enters actlvlt y- 
into the pursuit of knowledge. In contemplating an aesthetic 
object we are mentally occupied with the concrete, whereas all 
the more serious intellectual work of science involves the diffi- 
culties of the abstract. The contemplation is, moreover, free from 
those restraints which are imposed on our mental activity by 
the desire to obtain knowledge. 

While as the highest phase of feeling aesthetic experience 
appears to belong to our subjective life, the hidden region of the 
soul, it is connected just as clearly, through the act uniform- 
of sense-perception, with the world of objects which is ityof 
our common possession. Beingthusdependentonacon- aesthetic 
templation of things in this common world it raises the expert- 
question whether, like the perception of these objects, ence ' 
it is a uniform experience, the same for others as for myself. We 
touch here on the last characteristic of aesthetic experience which 
needs to be noted at this stage, its uniformity or subjection to 
law. It is a common idea that men's judgments about matters 
of taste disagree to so large an extent that each individual is 
left very much to his subjective impressions. With regard to 
many of the subtler matters of aesthetic appreciation, at any 
rate, there is undoubtedly on a first view the appearance of a 
want of agreement. Contrasted with logical judgments 
or even with ethical ones, aesthetic judgments may no ae ^ e<fc 
doubt look uncertain and " subjective." The proposi- judgment. 
tion " this tree is a birch " seems to lend itself much 
better to critical discussion and to general acceptance or rejection 
than the proposition " this tree is beautiful." This circumstance, 
as Kant shrewdly suggests, helps to explain why we have come 
to employ the word " taste " in dealing with aesthetic matters; 
for the pronouncements of the sense of taste are recognized 
as among the most uncertain and " subjective " of our sense- 
impressions. Yet viewed as a species of pleasurable feelings, 
aesthetic experiences will be found to exhibit a large amount of 
uniformity, of objective agreement as between different experi- 
ences of the same person and experiences of different persons. 
This general agreement appears to be clearly implied in the 
ordinary form of our aesthetic judgments. To say " this rose is 
beautiful " means more than to say " the sight of this rose affects 



278 



AESTHETICS 



me agreeably." It means that the rose has a general power of 
Lorical so a ff ec ting me (at different times) and others as well. 
judgment The judgment is not the same as a logical one. It 
andjudg- does not say or imply that as a matter of fact it always 
meat of ^ Qes pi ease — even jf we ^d the limitation, those who 

possess the sensibilities and the taste presupposed; 
for, as we know, our varying mood and state of receptivity make 
a profound difference in the fulness of the aesthetic enjoyment. 
It is a " judgment of value " which claims for the rose aesthetic 
rank as an object properly qualified to please contemplative 
subjects. This value, it is plain, is relative to conscious subjects; 
yet since it is relative to all competent ones, it may be regarded 
as " objective " — that is to say, as belonging to the object. 1 

This slight preliminary inspection of the subject will prepare 
one for the circumstance that the scientific treatment of it has 
Latede- begun late, and is even now far from being complete. 
velopment This slowness of development is in part explained 
of the \yy t ne detachment of aesthetic experience from the 
scence. ur g en t needs of life. In a comparatively early stage 
of human progress some thought had to be bestowed on such 
pressing problems as to how to cope with the forces of nature 
and to turn them to useful account; how to secure in human 
communities obedience to custom and law. But the problem of 
throwing light on our aesthetic pleasures had no such urgency. 2 
To this it must be added that aesthetic experience (in all but its 
simpler and truder forms) has been, and still is confined to a 
small number of persons; so that the subject does not appeal 
to a wiili popular interest; while, on the other hand, the sub- 
jects of this experience not infrequently have a strong senti- 
mental dislike to the idea of introducing into the region of refined 
feeling the cold light of scientific investig ition. Lastly, there are 
special difficulties inherent in the subject. One serious obstacle 
to a scientific theory of aesthetic experience is the illusive 
character of many of its finer elements — for example, the subtle 
differences of feeling-tone produced by the several colours as 
well as by their several tones and shades, by the several musical 
intervals, and so forth. Finally, there is the circumstance just 
touched on that much of this region of experience, instead of 
at once disclosing uniformity, seems to be rather the abode of 
caprice and uncertainty. The variations in taste at different 
levels of culture, among different races and nations and among 
the individual members of the same community are numerous 
and striking^ and might at first seem to bar the way to a scien- 
tific treatment of the subject. These considerations suggest 
that an adequate theory of aesthetic experience could only be 
attempted after the requisite scientific skill had been developed 
in other and more pressing departments of inquiry. 

If we glance at the modes of treating the subject up to a quite 
recent date we find but little of serious effort to apply to it a 

strictly scientific method of investigation. The whole 
theories 0/ extent of concrete experience has not been adequately 
subject. recognized, still less adequately examined. For the 

greater part thinkers have been in haste to reach some 
simple formula of beauty which might seem to cover the more 
obvious facts. This has commonly been derived deductively 
from some more comprehensive idea of experience or human 
life as a whole. Thus in German treatises on aesthetics which 
have been largely thought out under the influence of philosophic 
idealism the beautiful is subsumed under the idea, of which it is 
regarded as one special manifestation, and its place in human 
experience has been determined by defining its logical relations 
to the other great co-ordinate concepts, the good and the true. 
These attempts to reach a general conception of beauty have 
often led to one-sidedness of view. And this one-sidedness has 
sometimes characterized the theories of those who, like Alison, 
have made a wider survey of aesthetic facts. 

Aesthetics, like Ethics, is a Normative Science, that is to say, 

1 See below for Kant's view of the aesthetic judgment, as having 
subjective universal validity. On the meaning of judgments of 
value see J. Cohn, Allgem. Asthetik, Einleitung, pp. 7 ft., and Teil i., 
Kap. 2 and 3. 

2 Cf. Ladd, Introduction to Philosophy, pp. 330, 331. 



concerned with determining the nature of a species of the desir- 
able or the good (in the large sense) . It seeks one or Aesthetics 
more regulative principles which may help us to as nor- 
distinguish a real from an apparent aesthetic value, m * tlve 
and to set the higher and more perfect illustrations of 
beauty above the lower and less perfect. As a science it will 
seek to realize its normative function by the aid of a patient, 
methodical investigation of facts, and by processes of observa- 
tion, analysis and induction similar to those carried out in the 
natural sciences. In speaking of aesthetics as a nor- Aesthetics 
mative science we do not mean that it is a practical not a 
one in the sense that it supplies practical rules which practical 
may serve- as definite guidance for the artist and the 
lover of beauty, in their particular problems of selecting and 
arranging elements of aesthetic value. It is no more a practical 
science than logic. The supposition that it is so is probably 
favoured by the idea that aesthetic theory has art for its special 
subject. But this is to confuse a general aesthetic theory — 
what the Germans call " General Aesthetics "—with a theory of 
art (Kunstwissenschaft). The former, with which we are here 
concerned, has to examine aesthetic experience as a whole; 
which, as we shall presently see, includes more than the enjoy- 
ment and appreciation of art. 

We may now indicate with more fulness the main problems 
of our science, seeking to give them as precise a-form as possible. 
At the outset we are confronted with an old and 
almost baffling question: " Is beauty a single quality f tne 
inherent in objects of perception like form or colour?" science. 
Common language certainly suggests that it is. 
Aesthetics, too, began its inquiry at the same point of view, and 
its history shows how much pains men have taken in i s beauty 
trying to determine the nature of this attribute, as well a single 
as that of the faculty of the soul by which it is per- *?f^' ,^ * , 
ceived. Yet a little examination of the facts suffices to ° 
show that the theory is beset with serious difficulties. Whatever 
beauty may be it is certainly not a quality of an object in the 
same way in which the colour or the form of it is a Beauty 
quality. These are physical qualities, known to us by not a 
specific modifications of our sensations. The beauty physical 
of a rose or of a peach is clearly not a physical quality. *" y ' 
Nor do we in attributing beauty to some particular quality in 
an object, say colour, conceive of it as a phase of this quality, 
like depth or brilliance of colour, which, again, is known by a 
special modification of the sensations of colour. Hence we 
must say that beauty, though undoubtedly referred to a physical 
object, is extraneous to the group of qualities which makes it a 
physical object. 

Beauty is frequently attributed to a concrete object as 
a whole — to a flower or shell, for example, as a visible whole. 
Our everyday aesthetic judgments are wont to leave 
the attributes thus vaguely referred to the concrete attributed 
object. Yet it is equally certain that we not infre- todit- 
quently speak of the beauty of some definable aspect ter ent 
or quality of an object, as when we pronounce the f^ objects. 
contour of a mountain or of a vase to be beautiful. 
And it may be asked whether, in thus localizing beauty, so to 
speak, in one of the constituent qualities of an object, we always 
place it in the same quality. A mere glance at the facts will 
suffice to convince us that we do not. We call the facade of a 
Greek temple beautiful with special reference to its admirable 
form; whereas in predicating beauty of the ruin of a Norman 
castle we refer rather to what the ruin means — to the effect of 
an imagination of its past proud strength and slow vanquishment 
by the unrelenting strokes of time. This fact that beauty ap- 
pertains now more to one quality, now more to another, helps 
us to understand why certain theorists, known as formalists, 
regard all beauty as formal or residing in form, whereas Formalists 
others, the idealists or expressionalists, view it as and ex- 
residing in ideal content or expression. These theories, Passion- 
however, like other attempts to find an adequate 
single principle of beauty, are unsatisfactory. Form and ideal 
content are each a great source of aesthetic enjoyment, and 



AESTHETICS 



279 



either can be found in a degree of supremacy which practically 
renders the co-operation of the other unimportant. The two 
buildings cited above, two human faces, two musical composi- 
tions, may exhibit in an impressive and engrossing way the 
beauty of form and of expression respectively. Nor is this all. 
Three Beauty refuses to be confined even to these two. 

ultimate There are the various beauties of colour, for example, 
modes of as exhibited in such familiar phenomena of nature as 

a ' sea and sky, autumn moors and woods. A slight 
analysis of the constituents of objects to which we attribute 
beauty shows that there are at least three distinct modes of 
this attribute, namely (1) sensuous beauty, (2) beauty of form 
and (3) beauty of meaning or expression, nor do these appear to 
be reducible to any higher or more comprehensive principle. 
It requires a certain boldness to attempt to effect a rapproche- 
ment between the formal and the expressional factor. 1 An 
apparent unification of the three seems at present only possible 
by substituting for beauty another concept at least equally 
vague, such as perfection, 2 which seems to imply the idea of 
purposiveness, and to apply clearly only to certain domains of 
beauty, e.g. organic form. 

We may now take another step and say that beauty appears 
to be a quality in objects which is not sharply differentiated 
Beauty from other and allied qualities. If we look at the 
and allied usages of speech we shall find that beauty has its 
coacep- kindred conceptions, such as gracefulness, prettiness 
°" s ' and others. Writers on aesthetics have spent much 

time on these " Modifications of the Beautiful." The point 
emphasized here is the difficulty of drawing the line between 
them. Even an expert may hesitate long before saying 
whether a human face, a flower or a cameo should be called 
beautiful or pretty. Must we postulate as many allied quali- 
ties as there are names for these pleasing aspects of objects? 
Or must we do violence to usage and so stretch the word 
" Beauty " as to make it cover all qualities or aspects of 
objects which have aesthetic value, including those " modifica- 
tions of the beautiful " which we know as the sublime, the 
comic and the rest? But the wider we try in this way to 
make the denotation of the term the vaguer grows the 
connotation. We are thus left equally incapable of saying 
what the quality is, and in which aspect or attribute of the object 
it inheres. 3 

It seems to follow that in constructing a scientific theory we 
do well to dispense with the assumption of an objective quality 
of beauty. Aesthetics will return to Kant and con- 
ttoacrf 1 ' ^ ne i tself to the examination of objects called beauti- 
objective ful in their relation to, and in their manner of affecting 
quality of our minds. 4 The aesthetic value of such an object 

beauty 
dispensed 



beauty w ^ ^ s viewed as consisting in the possession of certain 



with. assignable characteristics by means of which it is fitted 

to affect us in a certain desirable way, to draw us into 
the enjoyable mood of aesthetic contemplation. These charac- 
teristics may conveniently be called aesthetic qualities. 5 Objects 
which are found to possess one or more of these 
qualities, qualities in the required degree of fulness claim a 
certain aesthetic value, even though they fall short 
of being "beautiful," in the more exacting use of this word. 
They are in the direction — " im Sinne," as Fechner says — of 
beauty, conceived as something fuller and richer, answering 
to a higher standard of aesthetic enjoyment and a severer 
demand on our part. The word " beauty " may still be used 
occasionally, where no ambiguity arises, as a convenient 

1 For example, that hinted at by Bosanquet in his definition of 
the beautiful, History of Aesthetic, p. 5. 

2 Beauty is defined as Perfection by P. Souriau, La Beaute 
rationnelle, 2« me partie. 

1 K. Groos argues well against this violent stretching of the word 
beautiful, Einleitung in die Asthetik, pp. 46 seq. 

* Kant, in developing his idea of beauty as subjective, was prob- 
ably influenced by Hume, who wrote: " Beauty is no quality in things 
themselves; it exists merely in the mind which contemplates 
them " {Essays, xxii.). 

5 On the nature of these qualities see S. Witasek, Grundziige der 
Mgem. Asthetik, p. 11. 



expression for aesthetic value in all its degrees. Yet it is 
better to keep the term applicable to the objects commonly 
denoted by it by making it represent the fuller aesthetic satis- 
factions which flow from a rare and commanding exhibition of 
one or more of these qualities, from what may be described as 
an appreciable excellence of aesthetic quality. 

By thus dispensing with the concept of beauty as some occult 
undefinable quality, we get rid of much of the contradiction 
which appears to inhere in our aesthetic experience. For ex- 
ample, a bit of brilliant colour in a bonnet which pleases the 
wearer but offends her superior in aesthetic matters takes its 
place as something which per se has a certain degree of aesthetic 
value even though the particular relations into which it has 
now thrust itself, palpable to the trained eye, may practically 
rob it of its value. In thus substituting the relative idea of 
aesthetic value for the absolute idea of beauty we may no doubt 
seem to be destroying the reality of the object of aesthetic 
perception. This point may more conveniently be taken 
up later when we consider the whole question of aesthetic 
illusion. 

This new way of envisaging aesthetic objects requires us to 
make the study of their effect a prominent part of our investiga- 
tion. In all the valuable recent work on the subject, 
attention has been largely concentrated on this effect. aes " a e e m c ° 
More particularly we have to investigate and illumine effect. 
scientifically the pleasurable side of the experience. In 
doing this we shall make use of all the light we can obtain from a 
study of known laws of pleasure. Thus we shall avail ourselves 
not only of the theory of the pleasure-tones of sensation Aesthetics 
but of that of the conditions of an agreeable exercise of and 
the attention upon objects, more particularly of the ' a,rai1 ' 
characteristics of objects which adequately stimulate p easure ' 
the attention without confusing or burdening it. Yet this does 
not require that we should treat the aesthetic problem as a part 
of the more general science of pleasure, as has been protiemot 
attempted by some, e.g. Grant Allen (Physiological aesthetic 
A esthetics) and Rutgers Marshall (Pain, Pleasure and enjoyment 
Aesthetics, and Aesthetic Principles). To do so would * s P« CIai 
be to run the risk of considering only the more general 
aspects and conditions of aesthetic enjoyment, whereas what we 
need is a theory of it as a specific kind of pleasurable experience. 
What is required at the present stage of development of the 
science is a deeper investigation of the aesthetic attitude of mind 
as a whole, of what we may call the aesthetic psychosis. We 
need to probe the act of contemplation itself, the mode of activity 
of attention involved in this calm, half-dreamlike gazing Th mm 
on the mere look of things unconcerned with their tude of 
ordinary and weightier imports. We need further to aesthetic 
determine the effect of this contemplative attitude c ° n j-f* n - 
upon the several mental processes involved, the act of 
perception itself, with its grasp of manifold relations, the flow 
of ideas, the partial resurgence and transformation of emotion. 
In examining these effects we must keep in view the double 
side of the contemplative attitude, the wide range of free 
movement which perception and imagination claim and enjoy, 
and the willing subjection of the contemplative mind to the 
spell of the object. A deeper inspection of the con- 
templative mood may be expected to render clearer l t nte , ttec ' d 
the difference between the mental activity employed aesthetic 
in aesthetic perception and imagination and intellectual activity 
activity proper; between, say, the differencing of allied ^!l ber 
tints involved in the finer aesthetic enjoyment of tiated. 
colour and the sharper, clearer discrimination of tints 
required in scientific observation, and between such a grasp of 
relations as is required for a just appreciation of beautiful 
form and that severe analysis and measurement of formal 
elements and their relations which is insisted upon by science. 
As a result of a finer distinction here we may probably be in 
a better position to determine the point — touched on more than 
once in recent works on aesthetics— how far intellectual pleasure 
proper, e.g. that of recognizing and classifying objects, enters 
as a subordinate element into aesthetic enjoyment. 



28o 



AESTHETICS 



One point in the characterization of aesthetic experience has 
been reserved, namely, the question whether it is essentially a 
. " form of social enjoyment. No one doubts that a man 

thetic often enjoys beauty, e.g. that of a landscape, when 

enjoyment alone; yet at such a moment he not only recognizes 
esseiiMiy tnat jjj s pleasure is a possible one for others, but is 

probably aware of a sub-conscious wish that others 
were present to share his enjoyment. Kant went so far as 
to say that on a desert island a man would adorn neither 
his hut nor his person. However this be, it seems certain that 
as a rule we tend to indulge our aesthetic tastes in company 
with others. This habit of making aesthetic enjoyment a social 
experience would in itself tend to develop the sympathies and 
the sympathetic intelligence and thus to promote exchanges of 
aesthetic experience. The content, too, of our aesthetic ex- 
periences would be favourable to such conjoint acts of aesthetic 
contemplation, and .to the mutual sharing of aesthetic experi- 
ences; for, as disinterested and universal modes of enjoyment 
detached from personal interests, they are clearly free from 
the egoistic exclusiveness which characterizes our private enjoy- 
ments which at best can only be participated in by one or two 
closely attached friends. Our aesthetic enjoyments are thus 
eminently fitted to be social ones; and as such they become 
greatly amplified by sympathetic resonance. 

We are now in a position to consider a point much discussed 
of late, namely, the special connexion of aesthetic enjoyment 

with the two senses, sight and hearing. Two questions 
Tae arise here: (i) Do the other and " lower" senses take 

senses. anv P art m aesthetic experience? (2) What are the 

characteristics which give the predominance to the 
two " higher " ones ? With regard to the first it is coming to be 
recognized that aesthetic pleasure is not strictly confined to the 
two senses in question. Common language suggests that we 
find in certain odours and even in certain flavours a value 
analogous to that implied in calling an object beautiful. Hegel 

excluded the other senses — even touch — on the ground 
A ? s f betlc f that aesthetics had to do only with art, in which 
touch. there was no place for perceptions of touch. A closer 

examination has shown that this important sense 
plays a considerable part in art-effects. And even if this were 
not so, Hegel's exclusion of touch from the rank of aesthetic 
senses would be a striking illustration of the narrowing effect on 
scientific theory of the identification of aesthetic objects with 
productions of art. To say that the experience of exploring 
with the fingers a velvety petal or the smooth surface of a sea- 
rounded pebble has no aesthetic element savours of a perverse 
arbitrariness. Touch is no doubt wanting in a prerogative of 
hearing and sight which we shall presently see to be important, 
namely, that being acted on by objects at a distance they admit 
of a simultaneous perception by a number of persons — as indeed 
even the sense of smell does in a measure. This is probably 
the chief reason why, according to certain testimony, the blind 
receive but little aesthetic enjoyment from tactual experience. 1 
Yet this drawback is compensated to some extent by the fact 
that agreeable tactual experience may be taken up as suggested 
meaning into our visual perceptions. 

The two privileged senses, sight and hearing, owe their superi- 
ority to a number of considerations. They are the farthest 
Preroga. removed from the necessary life functions, with the 
tires ot pressing needs and disturbing cravings which belong to 
s J g ^. al " 1 these. Even touch, though important as a source of 

knowledge, has for its primary function to examine 
the things which approach our organisms in their relation 
to this as injurious or harmless. The two higher senses 
present to us material objects in their least aggressive and 
menacing manner: visible forms and colours, tones and their 
combinations, appear when compared with objects felt to be in 
contact with our body, to be rather semblances or distant signs 
of material realities than these realities themselves; and this 
circumstance fits these senses to be in a special way the organs 
of aesthetic perception with its calm, dreamlike detachment 
1 See J. Cohn, Allgem. Asthetik, p. 95. 



and its enjoyable freedom of movement. They are, moreover, 
the two senses by the use of which a number of persons may 
join most perfectly in a common act of aesthetic contemplation. 
This distinction strengthens their claims to be in a special 
manner the aesthetic senses, and this for a double reason. (1) 
It makes them sense-avenues by which each of us obtains the 
most immediate and most impressive conviction that aesthetic 
experience is a common possession of the many, and is largely 
similar in the case of different individuals. (2) It marks them 
off as the senses by the exercise of which perceptual enjoyment 
may most readily and certainly be increased through the resonant 
effects of sympathy. The experiences of the theatre and of the 
concert-hall sufficiently illustrate these distinguishing functions 
of the two senses. Other distinguishing prerogatives of sight 
and hearing flow from the characteristics of their sensations 
and perceptions, a point to be touched on later. 8 

Our determination of the characteristics of the aesthetic 
attitude has now been carried far enough to enable us to consider 
another point much discussed in recent aesthetic 
literature, viz. the relation of this attitude to that of / ^^ Uc 
Play. The affinities of the two are striking and are and play. 
disclosed in everyday language, as when we speak of (a) Points 
the " play " of imagination or of " playing " on a ? t f^ lnity 
musical instrument. Both play and aesthetic con- t nem , 
templation are activities which are controlled by no 
extraneous end, which run on freely directed only by the 
intrinsic delight of the activity. Hence they both contrast 
with the serious work imposed on us and controlled by what we 
mark off as the necessities of life, such as providing for bodily 
wants, or rearing a family. They each add a sort of luxurious 
fringe to life. In aesthetic enjoyment our senses, our intelligence 
and our emotions are alike released from the constraint of these 
necessary ends, and may be said to refresh themselves in a kind 
of play. Finally, they are both characterized by a strong infusion 
of make-believe, a disposition to substitute productions of the 
imagination for everyday realities. In this respect, again, they 
form a contrast to that serious concern with fact and practical 
truth which the necessary aims of life impose on us. Little 
wonder, then, that Plato recognized in the contrast between the 
representative and the useful arts an analogy between play and 
earnest, 3 and that since the time of Schiller so much use has been 
made of the analogy in aesthetic works. Yet though 
similar, the two kinds of activity are distinguishable in <<b )J^ ts 
important respects. For one thing, aesthetic contem- ence- 
plation pure and simple is a comparatively tranquil 
and passive attitude, whereas play means doing something and 
commonly involves some amount of strenuous exertion, either 
of body or of mind. A closer analogy might be drawn between 
play and artistic production. Yet even when the parallel is thus 
narrowed, pretty obvious differences disclose themselves. It 
is only in their more primitive phases that, the two attitudes 
exhibit a close similarity. As they develop, striking divergences 
begin to appear. The play mood, instead of approaching the 
calm contemplative mood of the lover of beauty, involves 
feelings and impulses which lie at the roots of our practical 
interests, viz. ambition, rivalry and struggle. It has, moreover, 
in all its stages a palpable utility — even though this is not 
realized by the player— serving for the exercise and development 
of body, intelligence and character. Beauty and art rise high 
above play in purity of the disinterested attitude, in placid 
detachment from the serviceable and the necessary, and, still 
more, in range and variety of refined interest, comprehended 
in " the love of beauty." Finally, aesthetic activities are 
directed by ideal conceptions and standards to which hardly 

2 Originally, as pointed out by Home and others, sight was re- 
garded as the sense by which we received impressions of beauty. 
Yet the recognition of the claims of hearing date back to Plato. 
(See Bosanquet, Hist, of Aesth. pp. 51-52). For recent discussions 
of the claims of sight and hearing see article by J. Volkelt, " Der 
Aesth. Werth der niederen Sinne," in Zeitschrift fur Psych, u. Phys. 
der Sinnesorgane, vol. xxix. pp. 402 ff. ; see also below, Biblio~ 
graphy. 

*Laws, 889 (see Bosanquet, op. cit. p. 54). 



AESTHETICS 



28 



anything corresponds in play save where games of skill take on 
something of the dignity of a fine art. 1 

So far as to the preliminary delimiting work in aesthetic 
science. Only a bare indication can be made as to the methods 
Methods of research by which its advance can be furthered, 
oirv and as to the several directions of inquiry which it 

""thl? w '" nave t0 f°l' ow - With regard to the former the 
method of investigation will consist in a careful 
inquiry into two orders of fact: (1) Objects which common 
testimony or the history of art show to be widely recognized 
objects of aesthetic value ; (2) records of the aesthetic experience 
of individuals, whether artists or amateurs. 

Since aesthetic experience is brought about and its modes 
determined by objects possessing certain qualities, it seems evi- 
Examina- dent that scientific aesthetics must make an examin- 
tioii of ation and comparison of these a fundamental part 
B "** eWc of its problem. These objects will, as already hinted, 
include both natural ones in the inorganic and organic 
worlds, and works of art which can be shown to be objects 
of general or widely recognized aesthetic value. Without 
Nature as attempting here to discuss adequately the relation of 
supplying natural beauty to that of art we may note one or two 
"wirf*"' P oints - Some contemplation and appreciation of the 
beautiful aspects of nature is not only prior in time 
to art, but is a condition of its genesis. The enjoyment of 
the pleasing aspects of land and sea, of mountain and dale, 
of the innumerable organic forms, has steadily grown with the 
development of culture; and this growth, though undoubtedly 
aided by that of the feeling for art— especially painting and 
poetry — is to a large extent independent of it. 2 Some of the 
finest insight into the secrets of beauty has been gained by those 
who had only a limited acquaintance with art. What is still 
more important in the present connexion is that the aesthetic 
experience gained by the direct contemplation of nature includes 
varieties which art cannot reproduce. It is enough to recall 
what Helmholtz and others have told us about the limitations 
of the powers of pictorial art to represent the more brilliant 
degrees of light; the admissions of painters themselves as to 
the limits of their art when it seeks to render the finer grada- 
tions of light and colour in such common objects as a tree-trunk or 
a bit of old wall. Nature, moreover, in spreading out her spaces 
of earth, sea and sky, and in exhibiting the action of her forces, 
does so on a scale which seems to make sublimity her prerogative 
in which art vainly endeavours to participate. 

On the other hand, it is coming to be seen that the construction 

of a theory of aesthetic values must be assisted by a much more 

Use of precise examination than aestheticists are commonly 

works of content to make, of works of art. The importance 

art by the Q f i nc i uc Jine these is that they are well-defined objec- 
theorlst. . , , , , . . 

tive expressions of what the aesthetic consciousness 
approves and prefers. In inquiring, for example, into the 
pleasing relations of colour we might have to wait long for 
a theory if we were dependent on what even so gifted a writer 
as Ruskin can tell us about nature's juxtapositions: whereas 
if it can be shown that throughout the history of chromatic art 
or during its better period there has been a tendency to prefer 
certain combinations, this fact becomes a piece of convincing 
_.„ , evidence as to their aesthetic value. Even here, 
ties In however, there are sources of uncertainty. It is not 
using true to say that a work of art is a pure outcome of 

works of tne aes thetic feeling of the artist, even if we take 
material. tn ' s m a comprehensive sense. It is subject to the 

influence of all the temporary feelings and tendencies 
of the time which produced it. The aesthetic motive which is 

1 Plato had a glimpse of the resemblance of art to play (see 
Bosanquet, op. cil. p. 54). Among modern writers the idea is 
specially connected with the names of Schiller and Herbert Spencer. 
In recent works the subject is touched on by S. Wittasek, Grundziige 
der allgem. Astketik. pp. 223 ff. ; Bray, Du Beau, pp. 62 ff., and by 
Rutgers Marshall and others referred to below in Bibliography. 

s Hence to say, as Bosanquet says (op. cit. pp. 3-4), that art is to 
nature as the scientific conception of the world to that of the ordinary 
observer, seems wide of the mark. 



supposed to originate it is apt to be complicated and disguised 
by other motives, e.g. utility in architecture, 3 an impulse to in- 
struct if not to reform in modern fiction. Again, if it is said that 
a certain degree of permanence assures us of the Effects of 
aesthetic value of a feature of art, we are met by the custom 
difficulty that custom plays an important part in art, on art,stlc 
the result of convention fixed by tradition often 
simulating the aspect of a deep-seated aesthetic prefer- 
ence. In this connexion it is to be remarked that even 
so permanent an element as symmetry may owe its quasi- 
aesthetic value to custom, by which is understood its wide and 
impressive display in the organic and even the inorganic world. 4 
Yet the influence of custom taken in this larger sense need not 
greatly disturb us. In aesthetics, as in ethics, the question of 
validity has to be kept distinct from that of origin. If symmetry 
(in general) is appreciated as aesthetically pleasing, the question 
of its genesis becomes immaterial. Another difficulty, not 
peculiar to aesthetic investigation, is that of reconstructing the 
modes of aesthetic consciousness represented by forms of art 
which differ widely from those of our own age and type of 
culture. 

In utilizing art material for aesthetic theory the theorist will 
need to note the work recently done by English and German 
writers on primitive art. And this not merely because Value of 
of the value of the early forms of art for a theory of primitive 
the evolution of the aesthetic consciousness ; but il r tf 
because the embryonic stages of art are likely to have 
a peculiar interest as illustrating in a comparatively isolated 
form some of the simpler modes of aesthetic appreciation, 
e.g. in the grouping of colours, in the mode of covering a surface 
with linear ornament. Yet it is not necessary to give primitive 
art a considerable place in a general aesthetics. As a normative 
science, it is to be remembered, this is much more immediately 
concerned with the higher stages of aesthetic culture. In seeking 
to establish norms or regulative principles, we must, it is evident, 
make a special, study of objects of art which belong to our own 
level of culture. For these reasons it would appear necessary 
to include in a general aesthetic theory some reference to the 
evolution of art and of the aesthetic consciousness. A further 
reason for including it is that the evolution of art supplies a most 
valuable auxiliary criterion of degree or height of Evolution 
aesthetic value. Provided that we distinguish what as alter. 
is a real process of evolution from one of mere change ^nof^ 
of fashion in taste, and that we confine ourselves to 
the larger features of the process, we may make the 
principle of evolution a serviceable one by regarding those 
forms and features of art as higher in respect of aesthetic value 
which grow distinct and relatively fixed in the later and better 
stages of the evolution of art. 5 This part of aesthetic investiga- 
tion should be made as exact as possible. Thus in 
dealing with the triads of colour said to be most fre- measnre- 
quently employed in the best period of Italian painting meat ot 
the observer should note and record as far as this is c *"J r ff* . 
possible not only the precise tints, but also the precise ^.,,1^4. 
degrees of their several luminosities. With regard to 
elements of form in art, the judicious use of photography and 
careful measurement would probably help us to understand the 
practices of art in its better periods. This examination of art 
material by the aesthetic theorist should be supplemented by a 
study of what artists have written about their methods, of the 
rules laid down for students of art, and lastly of the generaliza- 
tions reached by the more scientific kind of writer upon art. 6 

A proper methodical inquiry into aesthetic objects aided by a 

3 K. Lange goes very far in attributing a practical motive to 
features of architecture commonly supposed to have aesthetic value, 
e.g. a regular series of similar forms (Das Wesen der Kunst, Bd. i. 
pp. 277 ff.). 

4 K. Lange thinks that even symmetry probably has a technical 
origin (op. cil. pp. 283-284). 

6 The question of the place of the historical development of art 
in aesthetic theory is carefully considered by J. Volkelt, System der 
Asthetik, Bd. i. 5" Kap. 

6 See, for example, a little work, The Genesis of Art-form, by G. L. 
Raymond. 



aesthetic 
height. 



2%2 



AESTHETICS 



la chil- 
dren, etc. 



knowledge of the practices of art would lead to inductions of 
the type " objects in so far as they possess such and 
indue- such characteristics are aesthetically valuable. " l This 
tions. preliminary work of aesthetic science in collecting and 

analysing facts may be extended in two directions: by 
an examination (a) of the earlier and simpler forms of aesthetic 
experience, and (b) of the fuller and more complex experiences 
aerms of °^ tnose specially trained in the perception and enjoy- 
aesthetic ment of beauty, (a) The former would be illustrated 
preference by a more methodical investigation into the rudiment- 
ary, aesthetic likings of children, and of the surviv- 
ing lower races. Such inquiries may be expected to 
add to our knowledge of the simpler and more universal 
forms of aesthetic enjoyment. Some attention has been paid 
by Darwin and others to germs of taste in birds and other animals. 
Yet this line of inquiry, though of some value for a theory of the 
evolution of taste, seems to throw but little light on aesthetic 
preferences as found in man. 2 An important feature in this new 
investigation into simpler modes of aesthetic preference 
expert- " ' s tnat '*• P rocee ds by way of experiment, that is to say, 
ment. a methodical testing of the aesthetic preferences of a 
number of individuals. Fechner introduced the method 
of experiment into aesthetics in his researches on the preferability 
(according to Zeising) of the proportion known as the " golden 
section." 3 Since his time other experimental inquiries have 
been made, bdth as to what forms {e.g. what variety of rectangle) 
and what combinations of colours are most pleasing. The results 
of these experiments are distinctly promising, though they have 
Expert- not yet been carried far enough to be made the basis of 
enceand perfectly trustworthy generalizations. 4 (b) A valuable 
judgments portion of the data for a science of aesthetics lies in the 
' recorded experiences of artists, art critics and others 
who have specially developed their tastes. This source of 
information has certainly never been made use of in a com- 
plete and methodical manner by theorists, a quotation now and 
again from writers like Goethe and Ruskin having been deemed 
sufficient. Yet it is safe to say that an adequate understanding 
of the finer effects of beauty, both in nature and in art, presup- 
poses the assimilation of what is best in these records. And 
this not only because they commonly supply us with new and 
valuable varieties of experience of the more refined kind, but 
because the aesthetic judgments on nature and art of men in 
whom the feeling of beauty has been specially cultivated have a 
greater value than those of others. 6 It may be added that these 
records are wont to contain reflexions which, though wanting 
in scientific precision, can be utilized by science. 

We now come to the work of scientific construction proper. 
The finer analysis of the objects which please aesthetically as 
Psycho- we 'l as of the agreeable type of consciousness to which 
logical they minister belongs to the psychologist, and it is 
analysis of noteworthy that the best recent contributions to the 
science have been made by men who were either 
known as psychologists or at least had trained themselves in 
psychological analysis. A word or two must suffice to indicate 
the more important directions of the theoretic interpretation. 
We may in illustrating this set out from the convenient triple 
division of the factors in aesthetic experience: (A) the sensuous, 
(B) the perceptual or formal, (C) the imaginative, including all 
that is suggested by the aesthetic presentation, its meaning and 
expressiveness. 

1 Kant, stopping short of an analysis of the beauty of a concrete 
object, said there were no aesthetic judgments of this universal form 
(see below). On the importance of these inductions see K. H. von 
Stein, Vorlesungen iiber Asthetik (Einleitung). 

2 Curiously enough Thomas Reid recognized a germ of aesthetic 
taste in animals. Essays, Of Taste, ch. v. The aesthetic importance 
of the observations made on animals is dealt with by L. Bray, Du 
Beau, pp. 233 ff. 

3 See below, and Bosanquet, op. cit. pp. 382 ff. 

4 The chief lines of experimental aesthetics are indicated by W. 
Wundt in his Physiol. Psychologie (5 e Auflage), Bd. iii. pp. 142 ff. 
and 147 ff. 

6 On the value of judgments of experts see K. Groos, Der asth. 
Genuss, p. 149. 



(A) In dealing with the sensuous factor the psychologist 
is materially aided by the physiologist. It is sufficient to point 
to the contribution made to the analysis of musical _. 
sensations by the classical researches of Helmholtz sensuous 
(see below). Yet the application of a knowledge of factor. 
physiological conditions seems as yet to be of little ph y sl ° m 
service when we come to the finer aspects of this Aesthetics. 
sensuous experience, to the subtle effects of colour- 
combination, for example, and to the nuances of feeling- tone 
attaching to different tints. In the finer analysis of the sensuous 
material of aesthetic enjoyment it is the psychologist who counts. 6 
Among the valuable contributions recently made in this 
domain one may instance the careful determination of J^a/*" 
the aesthetically important characteristics of the sensa- problems. 
tions of sight and hearing, such as the finely graduated 
variety of their qualities (colour and tone), their capability 
of entering into combinations in which they preserve their 
individuality, including the important combinations of time 
and space form. With these are to be included the distinguish- 
ing characteristics of the concomitant feeling-tones, e.g. their 
comparative calmness and their clear separation from the 
sensations which they accompany. These characteristics help 
us to understand the greater refinement of these senses and also 
the more prolonged as well as varying enjoyment which they 
contribute, as well as the extension of this enjoyment by imagina- 
tive reproduction. 7 Next to this determination of important 
aesthetic characteristics of the two senses may be named a finer 
probing of the nuances of pleasurable tone exhibited by the 
several colours and tones. A point still needing special investiga- 
tion is extent of the sensuous factor in aesthetic enjoyment. 
There has been a tendency in aesthetic theory to over-intellectual- 
ize aesthetic experience and to find the value even of the sensuous 
factor in some intellectual principle, as when it is said (by Plato 
and Hegel among others) that a smooth or level tone and a 
uniform mass of colour owe their value to the principle of unity. 
But such prolongation (within obvious limits) in time or space is 
a condition of the full enjoyment of the distinctive quality of an 
individual tone or colour, and as such has a sensuous value. 
Aesthetics has to prove the sensuous value, the pleasure which 
is due not only to the feeling-tones of the several sensations 
but to those of their various combinations. Spite of a tendency 
of late to disparage the co-operation of the " motor sensations " 
connected with movements of the eye in the aesthetic apprecia- 
tion of linear form, e.g. curves, evidence suggests that certain 
curves, like fine gradations of colour, may owe a considerable 
part of their value to a mode of varying the sensuous experience 
which is in a peculiar manner agreeable. On the other hand, this 
theoretic investigation of sense-material will need to determine 
with care the added value due to the action of experience in 
giving something of meaning to particular colours and tones 
and their combinations, e.g. warmth of colour, height of tone. 

(B) Under the scientific treatment of the perceptual or formal 
factor in aesthetic experience we have many special problems, 
of which only a few can be touched on here. Taking 

this factor to include all combinations of elements in perceptual 
which there is a more or less distinct perception of factor. 
pleasing relations, we meet here with such work as that 
of C. Stumpf (Ton-psychologie) in determining the way in which 
tones combine and tend to fuse. Later experiments have added 
to our knowledge of the obscure subject of colour harmony, 
enabling us to distinguish pleasing contrasts of colour from the 
more restful combinations of nearly allied tints. Our knowledge 
of pleasing form in the narrower sense, that is to say, space and 
time form, has been advanced by a number of recent inquiries. 
The value of symmetry, the meaning of proportion and the 
aesthetic value to be set on certain proportions, the forms of 
rhythm — these are some of the points dealt with in more general 

6 Examples of a forcing of the physiological method in aesthetics 
may be found in the Physiological Aesthetics of Grant Allen, and the 
Aufgabe der Kunstphysiologie, by Georg Hirsch. 

7 These aesthetic prerogatives of the sensations of hearing and 
sight have been well brought out in the article by J. Volkelt, already 
referred to. 



AESTHETICS 



283 



and in special works. 1 In the case of forms, still more than in 
that of sensuous elements, it is needful to determine the extent 
to which the value of the formal aspect is modified by experience 
and the acquisition of meaning. This is pretty certainly the 
•source of the aesthetic value claimed for certain proportions, 
whether in the human figure or other organic forms or in the 
treer constructions of form in art. 2 Another problem is to deter- 
mine the influence of the feeling-tones of the combining elements 
on the pleasing character of the whole. It is probable that a 
particular combination of colours owes something of its pleasure- 
value to a harmony of the feeling- tones of the elements. This 
is pretty certainly the case where the feeling-tones of the elements 
are closely akin, as in the case of a number of low tones of colours, 
or of architectural or other forms where one formal element — 
say, a vertical line, a rectangle of a certain proportion or a 
particular variety of arch — repeats itself and becomes a dominat- 
ing feature of the whole. 

(C) The imaginative factor — which corresponds with what 
Fechner calls the " indirect " — includes all that imaginative 
activity adds to our enjoyment when we contemplate 
xinaUve' an aest hetic object. It may consist first of all in re- 
factor. calling concrete experiences firmly associated with the 
object, as when the sight of wild-flowers in a London 
street calls up an image of fields and lanes. In order that these 
images may add to the aesthetic value of the object they must 
correspond to Our common associations, as distinguished from 
accidental individual ones. A large increase of aesthetic enjoy- 
ment comes to us through such suggested images. Although in 
general it is images of concrete objects which are called up, ideas 
of a more abstract character may take part though they tend 
in this case to assume a concrete aspect. This is illustrated in 
the appreciation of " typical beauty" in which a concrete form 
represents in an exceptional way the common form of a species, 
and in that of symbolic representation. An important part of 
this work of association is to render objects expressive of mental 
states, as when we read off the particular shade of feeling ex- 
pressed by a natural scene. 3 

In the poetic contemplation of nature, her forces, her gladness 

and other moods, this imaginative activity, though still deriving 

its material from association, takes a freer form, 

,, e l p J- leading to an investment of natural objects with a 
oflmagin- ° .... . ' , 

atioa. new and more fanciful meaning, as when we 

" apperceive " a willow drooping over a pond or 
the front of an old cottage under a quasi-human form, 
endowing it with something akin to our own feelings and 
memories. What, it may be asked, is the whole range of this 
freer play of a life-giving fancy in our aesthetic enjoyment? 
Some recent theorists have attempted to answer this question 
by saying that it constitutes a vital element in all aesthetic con- 
templation. Th. Lipps and others who follow him seek to show 
that this vitalizing activity of the fancy, which produces a new 
and illusory object, is the essential ingredient in the aesthetic 
enjoyment of the forms of material objects. According to this 
theory, when in the aesthetic mood I enjoy the form of a tree, of 
a church steeple or of the front of a Greek temple, I am not only 
ascribing life and feeling to it, but am projecting myself in fancy 
into the object thus constructed, feeling for the moment that I 
am the tree or the steeple. The process of vivification is carried 
out as follows. Lines represent certain movements, and in the 
aesthetic mood we translate all lines and so all forms back into 
the corresponding movements, which may be merely imagined (as 

1 On the later investigations into musical consonance and har- 
mony, harmony of colours, rhythmic and pleasing spatial forms, 
see Wundt, op. cit. Bd. ii. pp. 419 ff., and iii. 135 ff., 140 ff., 147 ff. 
and 1 54 ff. Time-form in music is specially discussed by E. Gurney, 
The Power of Sound, v. 

2 K. Lange, who recognizes the influence of nature and custom, 
here denies that proportion is an aesthetic principle (Das Wesen der 
Kunst. II" Kap.). 

3 Alison and other English Associationists have emphasized the 
aesthetic importance of the principle of association. Among more 
recent advocates of it is G. T. Fechner, Vorschule der Asthehk, and 
0. Kiilpe, "fiber den associativ. Factor des asthet. Eindrucks," 
Vierteljahrsschrift fur wissensch. Philosophic, xxiii. pp. 145 ff. 



Lipps himself thinks) or may be realized in part by sensuous 
elements, viz. motor sensations; which again may be regarded 
either as concomitants of eye movements, or as arising from an 
organically connected impulse to move the hand along the lines 
followed by the eye. 4 Thus the columns of a temple represent 
upward movement, and are apperceived as striving upwards so as 
to resist the downward pressure of the entablature. Since move- 
ments are the great means of expression in man, this imagina- 
tive reading of movement into motionless and even massive and 
stable forms enables us to endow them with quasi-human feelings. 
In looking, for example, at the weighty masses of a building we 
enter sympathetically into the successful strivings of the sup- 
porting structures to resist the downward thrust of gravity in 
the supported masses. The theory here briefly indicated 5 is 
interesting as illustrating an attempt from the psychological 
side to find a scientific support for philosophic idealism or ex- 
pressionalism. It is already beginning to be recognized in 
Germany as an exaggeration. It may be enough to say that as 
applied to forms generally, including those of sculpture and 
architecture, the theory is opposed by our ordinary way of speak- 
ing, which implies quite another point of view in the aesthetic 
contemplation of form, namely, that of a spectator external to 
the object contemplated. When our eye glides over the beauties 
of a statue, our imaginative activity so far from transporting us 
within the object carries us as tactual feelers outside the surface. 
Similarly, when we delight in the divided spaces of a Gothic roof, 
so far from being imaginatively engaged in taking part in the 
efforts and strains of pillar, arch and the rest, we move in fancy 
along the pathways defined by the designer, tactually feeling 
and appreciating each dimension, each detail of form. The 
attempt to force a theory fitted for poetry on sculpture and archi- 
tecture would rob these of their distinctive aesthetic values; 
in the one case, of the plastic beauty of finely moulded marble 
surfaces as realized by imaginative excursions of the hand; and 
in the other case, of the perfect stillness and stability which give 
to great structures their solemn and quieting aspect. 6 

The theory of a vitalizing play of imagination (Einftihlung) 
running through all modes of aesthetic contemplation is an 
exaggeration of the element of illusion which certainly 
characterizes this contemplation. As suggested above, masioa. 
by blotting out for the moment the perception of all 
save that which pleases it substitutes a new for the more solid 
reality of our practical mood. Moreover, as a state of perceptual 
absorption in which one loses consciousness of the ordinary 
self and its world, it has a certain resemblance to the state of 
ecstasy and of the hypnotic trance. 7 It is favourable to the 
play-like indulgence in a fanciful transformation of what is 
seen or heard, which may be described as a " willing self-decep- 
tion," more or less complete. Yet as we have seen, something 
of the real everyday world survives even in our freer aesthetic 
contemplation of form. Hence there is much to be said for the 
idea that we have in aesthetic illusion to do with a kind of 
double consciousness, a tendency to an illusory acceptance of 
the product of our fancy as the reality, restrained by a sub- 
conscious recognition of the everyday tangible reality behind. 8 

It is evident that both in the more confined and in the freer 
form the element of imaginative activity in aesthetic experience 
will vary greatly among individuals and among peoples. Differ- 
ences in past experience leading to diverse habits of association, 

4 This idea of imitative hand-movement in contemplating form 
is supported by K. Groos, Der dsth. Genuss, pp. 49 ff. 

6 It is commonly spoken of as " feeling oneself into " (Ein- 
fiihlen), or as " sympathetic feeling " (Mitempfinden) . 

1 6 Lipps'. theory is developed in a number of works, the chief of 
which is Asthetik: Psychologic des Schbnen und der Kunst, see esp. i er 
Theil, i er to 3 er Abschnitt; cf. Paul Stern, Einftihlung und Associa- 
tion, in which is to be found an historical sketch of the theory, and 
A. Hildebrand, Form in der bildenden Kunst. The play of imagina- 
tion in the contemplation of v form is discussed also by P. Souriau, 
V Esthetique du mouvement, 3 eme part., and La Suggestion dans fart, 
pp. 300 ff. Cf. works of Karl Groos and K. Lange named below 
(Bibliography) . 

7 See P. Souriau, La Suggestion dans I'art (l Bre partie). 

8 Cf. K. Lange, op. cit. Bd. i. p. 208. 



284 



AESTHETICS 



Aesthetic 
emotion. 



as well as in those natural dispositions which prompt one person 
to prefer motor images, another visual, another audile, will 
Variations modify the process in this enjoyable enlargement and 
ofimagin- transformation of what is presented to sense. It is 
atlve f or aesthetics at once to recognize these variations 

M v y ' of imaginative activity and to determine the more 
common and universal directions which it follows. 

The recent inquiry into our way of contemplating form is, 
in spite of exaggeration, valuable as showing that our distinc- 
_ , tions of form and expression are not absolute. Just 

horm ana . r r . . . . , r , 

expression as there is the rudiment of ideal significance m colour, 
not so form, even in its more abstract and elementary 

absolutely as p e cts, is not wholly expressionless, but may be 
s endowed with something of life by the imagination. 

The recognition of this truth does not, however, affect the validity 
of our treating form and expression as two broadly distinguish- 
able factors of aesthetic pleasure. A line may be pleasing to 
sense-perception, and in addition illustrate expressional value 
by suggested ease of movement or pose. Similarly, a concrete 
form, e.g. that of a sculptured human figure in repose, or of a 
graceful birch or fern, owes its aesthetic value to a happy com- 
bination of pleasing lines and of interesting ideas. 

In close connexion with the determination of the imaginative 
factor in aesthetic contemplation, the psychologist is called on 
to define the special characteristics of aesthetic emo- 
tion. That our attitude when we watch a beautiful 
object, say the curl of a breaker as it falls, or some 
choice piece of sculpture, is an emotional one is certain, and 
ingenious attempts have been made by Home (Lord Karnes) 
and others to equip the emotion with a full accompaniment 
of corporeal activity, such as heightened respiratory activity. 1 
Yet aesthetic emotion is to be contrasted with the more violent 
and passionate state of love and other emotions, and this differ- 
ence calls for further investigation. A closer inquiry into the 
features of that calm yet intense emotion which a rapt state of 
aesthetic contemplation induces is a necessary preliminary to a 
scientific demarcation of the sphere of beauty in the narrow or 
more exclusive sense, from that of the sublime, the tragic and 
the comic. Each of these departments of aesthetic experience 
has well-marked emotional characteristics; and the definition 
of these " modifications of the beautiful " has in the main been 
reached through an analysis of the emotional states involved. 
This chapter in the psychological treatment of aesthetic experi- 
ence has to consider two points which have occupied a prominent 
place in aesthetic theory. The first is the nature of " revived " 
or " ideal " emotion, such as is illustrated in the feeling excited 
sympathetically when we witness or hear of another's sorrow or 
joy. The second point is the nature of those mixed emotional 
states which are illustrated in our aesthetic enjoyment of the 
sublime and the other " modifications," in all of which we can 
recognize a kind of double emotional consciousness in which 
painful elements accompany and modify pleasurable ones, in 
such a manner that in the end the latter appear to be rather 
strengthened than weakened. 2 

The psychological treatment of aesthetic data here sketched 
out cannot stop at an analysis of the aesthetic state or attitude 
into a number of recognizable elements each of which 
analysis In contributes its own quantum of pleasurableness. Our 
aesthetics, enjoyment in contemplating, say, a green alp set 
above dark crags, is an indivisible whole. And it is a 
consciousness of this fact which makes men disposed to resent 
the dissection of their aesthetic enjoyment into a number of 
constituent pleasures. Nor is this all. Every aesthetic object 

1 See a curious passage in Home's Elements of Criticism, chap, iv., 
in which the emotions excited by great and elevated objects are 
said to express themselves externally by a special inflating inspira- 
tion, and by stretching upward and standing " a-tiptoe " respec- 
tively; also an article on " Recent Aesthetics "by Vernon Lee in 
the Quarterly Review, 1904, part i. pp. 420-443. 

2 See Hume, Essays, " Essay of Tragedy," and the important 
discussions on the meaning of Aristotle's doctrine of the emotions of 
tragedy and of emotional purification or " alleviating discharge" 
((cdflapffis) touched on by Bosanquet, op. cit. pp. 64 ff . and 234 5. 



is something unique, differing in individual characteristics from 
all others; and as the object, so the mood of the contem- 
plator. One may almost say that there are as many modes of 
musical delight as there are worthy compositions. It would seem 
either that this feeling of a unique indivisible whole must be 
dismissed as an illusion, or that we have to admit an unexplained 
residue in our aesthetic experience, which may some day be 
explained by help of a larger and more exact conception of 
aesthetic harmony, of the laws of interaction and of fusion of 
psychical elements. 3 

We may now glance at the ideal purpose of this scientific 
analysis and interpretation, namely, the construction of norms 
or regulative principles corresponding to the severally Construe- 
essential elements of aesthetic value ascertained. ' The tion of 
later psychological treatment of the subject has led aesthetic 
up to the formulation of certain ideal . requirements 
in beautiful objects. The work of Fechner in this direction 
(Vorschule der Asthetik) was a noteworthy contribution 
to this kind of construction, at once scientific and directed 
to the construction of ideal demands, and is still a model for 
workers in the same field. He has taught us how the attempt 
to formulate one all-comprehensive principle — e.g. unity in 
variety, has led to a barren abstractedness, and that we need in 
its place a number of more concrete principles. In formulating 
these principles care must be taken to determine their respective 
scopes and their mutual relations — to decide, for example, whether 
expression, to which our modern feeling undoubtedly ascribes 
a high value, is a universal demand in the same sense as unity 
or harmony of parts is admitted to be. A system of norms 
must further supply some comprehensive criterion by help of 
which degrees of aesthetic value may be determined, as determined 
by the degrees of completeness of the several pleasurable activities, 
— -sensuous, perceptual and imaginative, — and justify the form 
of judgment " this object is more beautiful (or of a higher kind 
of beauty) than that." Such regulative principles and standards 
of comparison will, it is clear, fail us just at the point where 
analysis stops. Edmund Gurney urges that an aesthetic prin- 
ciple such as unity in variety is complied with equally well by 
musical compositions which are commonplace and leave us cold 
and by those which evoke the full thrill of aesthetic delight, and 
he concludes that the special beauty of form in the latter in- 
stance is appreciated by a kind of intuition which cannot be 
analysed (see The Power of Sound, ix.). The argument is hard 
to combat. It would seem that after all our efforts to define 
aesthetic qualities and enumerate corresponding ideal require- 
ments we are left with an unexplained remainder. This can 
only be tentatively defined as the concrete object itself in its 
wholeness, which is not only a perfectly harmonized combina- 
tion of sensuous, formal and expressional values, but impresses 
us as something which has a fresh individuality and the distinc- 
tion of aesthetic excellence. 

Aesthetics is wont to treat of a certain kind of experience as 
if it were a closed compartment. Yet there is in reality no such 
perfect seclusion. Our enjoyment of beauty, though connexion 
to be distinguished from our intellectual and our between 
practical interests, touches and interacts with these, aesthetic 
With regard to intellectual interests it is clear that "" a ° r i ^ er 
much of the mental activity which enters into our eace: („) 
aesthetic enjoyment is intellectual — e.g. in the per- within- 
ception of the relations of form, even though it stops * e ^ ctaal 
short of the abstract analysis of scientific observation. 
Again, in appreciating beauty of type which involves according 
to Taine a recognition of the most important characters of the 
species, we are, it is evident, close to the scientific point of view. 
Similarly, when scientific knowledge enables us in the mood of 
aesthetic contemplation to retrace imaginatively the mode of 
formation of a cloud or a mountain form, or the mode in 
which a climbing plant finds its way upwards. It is for 
aesthetics to recognize the fact, and to discriminate a 

3 That beauty implies a peculiar blending of formal and spiritual 
(geistige) factors is recognized by H. Riegel, Die bildende Kunste, 
pp. 16 ff. 



AESTHETICS 



285 



legitimate aesthetic function of scientific ideas when they en- 
large the scope of a pleasurable play of the imagination, and 
are freed from the control of a serious purpose of explaining 
what is seen. 

A similar remark applies to the contacts of our aesthetic with 
our practical interests. While as dominant factors the latter 
are excluded from aesthetic activity they may in- 
practlcal Auence our feeling for beauty in an indirect and sub- 
interests. ordinate way. This is recognized by those {e.g. Home) 
who insist on a particular kind of aesthetic value 
under the name of relative beauty, or the pleasing aspect of 
fitness for a purpose. If a drinking-vessel please in part because 
of its perfect adaptation to its purpose, the aesthetic value 
ascribed to it seems to derive something from a feeling of respect 
for utility itself. In another way beauty reasserts in modern 
aesthetics that kinship with utility on which it insisted in the 
days of Socrates. The idea that typical beauty co- 
treatment incides with what is vigorous and conducive to the 
of beauty, conservation of the species is as old as Hobbes. 1 
Darwin and his followers have developed the bio- 
logical conception that sexual selection tends to develop 
aesthetic preferences along lines which correspond to what 
subserves the maintenance of the species or tribe. Recent 
writers have shown how the rude germs of aesthetic activity in 
primitive types of community would subserve necessary tribal 
ends — e.g. musical rhythm by exercising members of the tribe 
in concerted war-like action. 2 Yet these interesting specula- 
tions have to do rather with the earlier stages of the evolution 
of the aesthetic faculty than with its functions in the higher 
stages. An idea of a social utility in aesthetic experience which 
does demand the attention of the theorist is that the culture of 
beauty and art has a socializing influence, helping to 
and ethics. & we to our em <>tional experience new forms of expres- 
sion whereby our sympathies are deepened and en- 
larged. 3 The further elucidation of this element of humanizing 
influence in aesthetic enjoyment may be expected to throw new 
light on the question, much discussed throughout the history 
of aesthetics, of the relation of the science to ethics, by showing 
that they have a common root in our sympathetic nature and 
interest in humanity. 

In order to complete the outline of aesthetic theory we need 
to glance at the relation of general aesthetics to the special prob- 
Aesthetic ' ems °^ Fine ^ rt- ^ ' s ey ident that the definition of 
theory and the aims and methods of art, both as a whole and in 
problems its several forms, involving as it does special technical 
of art. knowledge, may with advantage be treated apart from 
a general theory. (See Fine Arts.) At the same time the 
study of art raises larger problems which require to be dealt 
with to some extent by this theory. We may instance the group 
of problems which have to do with the relation of art to 
" beauty " in its narrower sense, such as the function of the 
painful and of the ugly in art, the meaning of artistic imitation 
and truth to nature, of idealization, and the nature of artistic 
illusion; also the question of the didactic and of the moral 
function of art. Even more special problems of art, such as 
the effect of the tragic, the nature of musical expression, can 
only be adequately treated in the light of a general aesthetic 
theory. 

In conclusion, it may be pointed out that the psychological 
theorist has of late been busy in an outlying region of art-lore, 
inquiring into the nature of the artistic impulse and tempera- 
ment, and into the processes of imaginative creation. These 
inquiries have been carried out to some extent in connexion 
with studies of the origin of art, and of the relation of art to the 

1 See passage in Human Nature (first part of Tripos), ch. viii. § 5 
(Molesworth's edition of Works, vol. iv. p. 38). 

2 See among others, R. Wallascheck, Primitive Music, pp. 270 ff., 
and Y. Hirn, The Origin of Art, pp. 9 ff. ; cf. W. Jerusalem, Einleitung 
in die Philosophic, pp. 116, 117. 

3 The idea of this social utility in aesthetic enjoyment is touched 
on by Kant, Critique of Judgment (Bernard's trans.), p. 174; and is 
more fully worked out by Guyau, L'Art au point de vue sociologique, 
ch. ii. and iii. ; cf. Rutgers Marshall, Aesthetic Principles, pp. 81-82. 



social environment. Their importance for aesthetics lies in the 
circumstance that they are fitted to throw light upon the aes- 
thetic consciousness as it is developed in those who are not only 
in a special sense cultivators of it, but represent in a peculiar 
manner the ideas and the aims of art. 1 

History of Theories 

In the following summary of the most important contributions 
to aesthetic doctrine, only such writings will be recognized as 
contribute to a general conception of aesthetic objects or experi- 
ence. These include the more systematic treatment of the sub- 
ject in philosophic works as well as the more thoughtful kind of 
discussion of principles to be met with in writings on art by 
critics and others. 

1. Greek Speculations. — Ancient Greece supplies us with the first 
important contributions to aesthetic theory, though these are 
scarcely, in quality or in quantity, what one might have expected 
from a people which had so high an appreciation of beauty and so 
strong a bent for philosophic speculation. The first Greek thinker 
of whose views on the subject we really know something is Socrates. 
We learn from Xenophon's account of him that he regarded the 
beautiful as coincident with the good, and both of them are resolvable 
into the useful. Every beautiful object is so called because it serves 
some rational end, whether the security or the gratification of man. 
Socrates appears to have attached little importance to the immediate 
gratification which a beautiful object affords to perception and 
contemplation, but to have emphasized rather its power of further- 
ing the more necessary ends of life. The really valuable point in 
his doctrine is the relativity of beauty. Unlike Plato, he recognized 
no self-beauty (airo to Ka\6v) existing absolutely and out of all 
relation to a percipient mind. 

Of the views of Plato on the subject, it is hardly less difficult to 
gain a clear conception from the Dialogues, than it is in the case 
of ethical good. In some of these, various definitions of 
the beautiful are rejected as inadequate by the Platonic Plato. 

Socrates. At the same time we may conclude that Plato's mind leaned 
decidedly to the conception of an absolute beauty, which took its 
place in his scheme of ideas or self -existing forms. This true beauty 
is nothing discoverable as an attribute in another thing, for these 
are only beautiful things, not the beautiful itself. Love (Eros) pro- 
duces aspiration towards this pure idea. Elsewhere the soul's in- 
tuition of the self-beautiful is said to be a reminiscence of its pre- 
natal existence. As to the precise forms in which the idea of beauty 
reveals itself, Plato is not very decided. His theory of an absolute 
beauty does not easily* adjust itself to the notion of its contributing 
merely a variety of sensuous pleasure, to which he appears to lean 
in some dialogues. He tends to identify the self -beautiful with the 
conceptions of the true and the good, and thus there arose the 
Platonic formula Ka\oK&.ya8ia. So far as his writings embody the 
notion of any common element in beautiful objects, it is proportion, 
harmony or unity among their parts. He emphasizes unity in its 
simplest aspect as seen in evenness of line and purity of colour. He 
recognizes in places the beauty of the mind, and seems to think that 
the highest beauty of proportion is to be found in the union of a 
beautiful mind with a beautiful body. He had but a poor opinion 
of art, regarding it as a trick of imitation (m£mw«) which takes us 
another step farther from the luminous sphere of rational intuition 
into the shadowy region of the semblances of sense. Accordingly, 
in his scheme for an ideal republic, he provided for the most inexorable 
censorship of poets, &c, so as to make art as far as possible an 
instrument of moral and political training. 

Aristotle proceeded to a more serious investigation of the aesthetic 
phenomena so as to develop by scientific analysis certain principles 
of beauty and art. In his treatises on poetry and rhetoric Ar i t a 
he gives us, along with a theory of these arts, certain Arlstot ' e - 
general principles of beauty; and scattered among his other 
writings we find many valuable suggestions on the same subject. 
He seeks (in the Metaphysics) to distinguish the good and 
the beautiful by saying that the former is always in action (iv irpa£«) 
whereas the latter may exist in motionless things as well (iv aKivtirois). 
At the same time he had as a Greek to allow that though essentially 
different things the good might under certain conditions be called 
beautiful. He further distinguished the beautiful from the fit, and 
in a passage of the Politics set beauty above the useful and necessary. 
He helped to determine another characteristic of the beautiful, the 
absence of all lust or desire in the pleasure it bestows. The universal 
elements of beauty, again, Aristotle finds (in the Metaphysics) to be 

1 On the nature of the primitive art-culture, see Rutgers Marshall, 
Aesthetic Principles, ch. iii.; M. Baldwin, Social and Ethical Inter- 
pretations, pp. 151 ff: Y. Hirn, The Origin of Art, ch. ii. On artistic 
fenius and its creative process, see H. Taine, The Philosophy of Art, 
'art ii. ; P. Souriau, V Imagination -de V artiste; G. Seailks, Essai 
sur la genie dans I'art; E. Grosse, Kunstwissenschaftliche Studien, 
iii. ; Arreat, Psychologie du peintre ; L. Dauriac, Essai sur V esprit 
musical. 



286 



AESTHETICS 



order (ra^ti), symmetry and definiteness or determinateness (t6 
iipiuiikvoy) . In the Poetics he adds another essential, namely, a certain 
magnitude ; it being desirable for a synoptic view of the whole that 
the object should not be too large, while clearness of perception 
requires that it should not be too small. Aristotle's views on art 
are an immense advance on those of Plato. He distinctly recog- 
nized (in the Politics and elsewhere) that its aim is immediate 
pleasure, as distinct from utility, which is the end of the mechanical 
arts. He took a higher view of artistic imitation than Plato, hold- 
ing that so far from being an unworthy trick, it implied knowledge 
and discovery, that its objects not only comprised particular things 
which happen to most, but contemplated what is probable and 
what necessarily exists. The celebrated passage in the Poetics, 
where he declares poetry to be more philosophical and serious a 
matter (attovBcubTepov) than philosophy, brings out the advance of 
Aristotle on his predecessor. He gives us no complete classification 
of the fine arts, and it is doubtful how far his principles, e.g. his 
celebrated idea of a purification of the passions by tragedy, are to 
be taken as applicable to other than the poetic art. 

Of the later Greek and Roman writers the Neo-Platonist Plotinus 
deserves to be mentioned. According to him, objective reason 
(tous) as self-moving, becomes the formative influence 
Plotinus. w h; c h reduces dead matter to form. Matter when thus 
formed becomes a notion (\6yos), and its form is beauty. 
Objects are ugly so far as they are unacted upon by reason, and 
therefore formless. The creative reason is absolute beauty, and is 
called the more than beautiful. There are three degrees or stages 
of manifested beauty: that of human reason, which is the highest; 
of the human soul, which is less perfect through its connexion with 
a material body; and of real objects, which is the lowest mani- 
festation of all. As to the precise forms of beauty, he supposed, in 
opposition to,. Aristotle, that a single thing not divisible into parts 
might be beautiful through its unity and simplicity. He gives a 
high place to the beauty of colours in which material darkness is 
overpowered by light and warmth. In reference to artistic beauty 
he said that when the artist has notions as models for his creations, 
these may become more beautiful than natural objects. This is 
clearly a step away from Plato's doctrine towards our modern 
conception of artistic idealization. 

2. German Writers. — We may pass by the few thoughts on the 
subject to be found among medieval writers and turn to modern 
German theories, beginning with those of German writers as 
writers *^ e mos t numerous and most elaborately set forth. The 
(a) Svs- fi rst °^ t ^ le Germans who attempted to develop an aes- 
" thetic theory as a part of a system of philosophy was 
Baumgarten (A esthetico) . Adopting the Leibnitz- Wolffian 
theory of knowledge, he sought to complete it by setting 
over against the clear scientific or " logical " knowledge 
garten. Q £ tne understanding, the confused knowledge of the 
senses, to which (as we have seen) he gave the name " aesthetic." 
Beauty with him thus corresponds with perfect sense-knowledge. 
Baumgarten is clearly an intellectualist in aesthetics, reducing taste 
to an intellectual act and ignoring the element of feeling. The 
details of his aesthetics are mostly unimportant. Arguing from 
Leibnitz's theory of the world as the best possible, Baumgarten 
concluded that nature is the highest embodiment of beauty, and 
that art must seek its supreme function in the strictest possible 
imitation of nature. 

The next important treatment of aesthetics by a philosopher is 
that of Kant. He deals with the " Judgment of Taste " in the 
Critique of the Power of Judgment (J. H. Bernard's trans- 
lation, 1892), which treatise supplements the two better- 
known critiques (vide Kant), and by investigating the conditions 
of the validity of feeling mediates between their respective subjects, 
cognition and desire (volition). He takes an important step in deny- 
ing objective existence to beauty. Aesthetic value for him is fitness 
to please as object of pure contemplation. This aesthetic satis- 
faction is more than mere agreeableness, since it must be disinter- 
ested and free — that is to say, from all concern about the real exist- 
ence of the object, and about our dependence on it. He appears to 
concede a certain formal objectivity to beauty in his doctrine of 
an appearance of purposiveness (Zweckmdssigkeit) in the beautiful 
object, this being defined as its harmony with the cognative faculties 
involved in an aesthetic judgment (imagination and understand- 
ing) ; a harmony the consciousness of which underlies our aesthetic 
pleasure. Yet this part of his doctrine is very imperfectly developed. 
While beauty thus ceases with Kant to have objective validity and 
remains valid only for the contemplator, he claims for it universal 
subjective validity, since the object we pronounce to be beautiful is 
fitted to please all men. We know that this must be so from re- 
flecting on the disinterestedness of our pleasure, on its entire inde- 
pendence of personal inclination. Kant insists that the aesthetic 
judgment is always, in logical phrase, an " individual," i.e. a singu- 
lar one, of the form " This object (e.g. rose) is beautiful." He 
denies that we can reach a valid universal aesthetic judgment of the 
form " All objects possessing such and such qualities are beautiful." 
(A judgment of this form would, he considers, be logical, not aesthetic.) 
In dealing with beauty Kant is thinking of nature, ranking this as a 
source of aesthetic pleasure high above art, for which he shows 
something of contempt. He seems to retreat from his doctrine of 



tematlc 

treatises 

Baum- 



pure subjectivity when he says that the highest significance oi 
beauty is to symbolize moral good ; going further than Ruskin when 
he attaches ideals of modesty, frankness, courage, &c, to the sever! 
primary colours of Newton's system. He has made a solid contribu- 
tion to the theory of the sublime, and has put forth a suggestive 
if a rather inadequate view of the ludicrous. But his main service 
to aesthetics consists in the preliminary critical determination of 
its aim and its fundamental problems. 

Schelling is the first thinker to attempt a Philosophy of Art. He 
develops this as the third part of his system of transcendental ideal- 
ism following theoretic and practical philosophy. (See . 
Schelling ; also Schilling's Werke, Bd. v., and J. Watson, * c * e ™»^ 
Schelling's Transcendental Idealism, ch. vii., Chicago, 1882.) Ac- 
cording to Schelling a new philosophical significance is given to art 
by the doctrine that the identity of subject and object — "'Inch is 
half disguised in ordinary perception and volition — is only clearly, 
seen in artistic perception. The perfect perception of its real self 
by intelligence in the work of art is accompanied by a feeling of 
infinite satisfaction. Art in thus effecting a revelation of the absolute 
seems to attain a dignity not merely above that of nature but above 
that of philosophy itself. Schelling throws but little light on the con- 
crete forms of beauty. His classification of the arts, based on his anti- 
thesis of object and subject, is a curiosity in intricate arrangement. 
He applies his conception in a suggestive way to classical tragedy. 

In Hegel's system of philosophy art is viewed as the first stage of 
the absolute spirit. (See Hegel; also Werke, Bd. x., and Bosan- 
quet's Introduction to Hegel's Philosophy of Fine Art.) In hi 

this stage the absolute is immediately present to sense- " e S e 

perception, an idea which shows the writer's complete rupture with 
Kant's doctrine of the " subjectivity " of beauty. The beautiful is 
defined as the ideal showing itself to sense or through a sensuous 
medium. It is said to have its life in show or semblance (Schein) 
and so differs from the true, which is not really sensuous, but the 
universal idea contained in sense for thought. The form of the 
beautiful is unity of the manifold. The notion (Begriff) gives 
necessity in mutual dependence of parts (unity) , while the reality 
demands the semblance (Schein) of liberty in the parts. He 
discusses very fully the beauty of nature as immediate unity of 
notion and reality, and lays great emphasis on the beauty of 
organic life. But it is in art that, like Schelling, Hegel finds 
the highest revelation of the beautiful. Art makes up for the 
deficiencies of natural beauty by bringing the idea, into clearer 
light, by showing the external world in its life and spiritual 
animation. The several species of art in the ancient and modern 
worlds depend on the various combinations of matter and form. 
He classifies the individual arts according to this same principle 
of the relative supremacy of form and matter, the lowest being 
architecture, the highest, poetry. 

Curious developments of the Hegelian conception are to be found 
in the dialectical treatment of beauty in its relation to the ugly, the 
sublime, &c, by Hegel's disciples, e.g. C. H. Weisse and J, K. F. 
Rosenkranz. The most important product of the Hegelian „.. . 
School is the elaborate system of aesthetics published by . * c 
F. T. Vischer (Asthetik, 3 Theile, 1846-1854). It illustrates °* .. 
the difficulties of the Hegelian thought and terminology; " c 2 e >iaBs. 
yet in dealing with art it is full of knowledge and highly suggestive. 

The aesthetic problem is also treated by. two other philosophers 
whose thought set out from certain tendencies in Kant's system, 
viz. Schopenhauer and Herbart. Schopenhauer (see c , 
Schopenhauer, also The World as Will and Idea, trans- * ca °J> ea - 
lated by R. B. Haldane, esp. vol. i. pp. 219-346), abandon- , bauen _ 
ing also Kant's doctrine of the subjectivity of beauty, found in 
aesthetic contemplation the perfect emancipation of intellect from 
will. In this contemplation the mind is filled with pure intellectual 
forms, the " Platonic Ideas " as he calls them, which are objecti- 
fications of the will at a certain grade of completeness of representa- 
tion. He exalts the state of artistic contemplation as the one in 
which, as pure intellect set free from will, the misery of existence is 
surmounted and something of blissful ecstasy attained. He holds 
that all things are in some degree beautiful, ugliness being viewed 
as merely imperfect manifestation or objectification of will. In this 
way the beauty of nature, somewhat slighted by Schelling and Hegel, 
is rehabilitated. 

J. F; Herbart (q.v.) struck out another way of escaping from 
Kant's idea of a purely subjective beauty (Kerbach's edition of 
Werke, Bd. ii. pp. 339 el seq.; Bd. iv. pp. 105 et seq., M er t, ar t 
and Bd. ix. pp. 92 et seq.). He did, indeed, adopt Kant's 
view of the aesthetic judgment as singular (" individual."); though 
he secures a certain degree of logical universality for it by emphasiz- 
ing the point that the predicate (beauty) is permanently true of the 
same aesthetic object. At the same time, by referring the beauty of 
concrete objects to certain aesthetic relations, he virtually accepted 
the possibility of universal aesthetic judgments (cf. supra). Since 
he thus reduces beauty to abstract relations he is known as a for- 
malist, and the founder of the formalistic school in aesthetics. He 
sets out with the idea that only relations please— in the Kantian 
sense of producing pleasure devoid of desire ; and his aim is to 
determine the " aesthetic elementary relations," or the simplest 
relations which produce this pleasure. These include those of will, 
so that, as he admits, ethical judgments are in a manner brought 



AESTHETICS 



287 



under an aesthetic form. His typical example of aesthetic relations 
in objects of sense-perception is that of harmony between tones. 
The science of thorough-bass has, he thinks, done for music what 
should be done also for other departments of aesthetic experience. 
This doctrine of elementary relations is brought into connexion with 
the author's psychological doctrine of presentations with their 
tendencies to mutual inhibition and to fusion, and of the varying 
feeling-tones to which these processes give rise. This mode of treat- 
ing the problem of beauty and aesthetic perception has been greatly 
developed and worked up into a complete system of aesthetics by 
one of Herbart's disciples, Robert Zimmermann {Asthetik, 1858). 

Lessing, in his Laocoon and elsewhere, sought to deduce the special 
function of an art from a consideration of the means at its disposal. 
Lesslasr ^ e to °k pains to define the boundaries of poetry and 
painting, and in so doing he reached general reflexions 
upon the ends and appliances of art. Among these his distinction 
between arts which employ the coexistent in space and those which 
employ the successive (as poetry and music) is of lasting value. In 
his dramatic criticisms he similarly endeavoured to develop clear 
general principles on such points as poetic truth, improving upon 
Aristotle, on whose teaching he mainly relies. 

Goethe wrote several tracts on aesthetic topics, as well as many 
aphorisms. He attempts to mediate between the claims of ideal 
Goethe beauty, as taught by J. J. Winckelmann, and the aims of 
Schiller individualization. Schiller (q.v.) discusses, in a number 
of disconnected essays and letters, some of the main ques- 
tions in the philosophy of art. He looks at art from the side of 
culture and the forces of human nature, and finds in an aesthetically 
cultivated soul the reconciliation of the sensual and rational. His 
letters on aesthetic education (Uber die asthetische Erziehung des 
Menschen, trans, by J. Weiss, Boston, 1845) are valuable, bringing 
out among other.' points the connexion between aesthetic activity 
and the universal impulse to play (Spieltrieb). Schiller's thoughts 
on aesthetic subjects are pervaded with the spirit of Kant's philo- 
sophy. Another example of this kind of reflective discussion of 
art by literary men is afforded us in the Vorschule der Asthetik of 
Jean Paul J ean P au ' Richter. This is a rather ambitious discussion 
of the sublime and ludicrous, which, however, contains 
much valuable matter on the nature of humour in romantic 
poetry. Among other writers who reflect more or less philosophically 
on the problems to which modern poetry gives rise are Wilhelm von 
Humboldt, the two Schlegels and Gervinus. 

A word may be said in conclusion on the attempts of German 
savants to apply a knowledge of physiological conditions to the 
Coatribu- investigation of the sensuous elements of aesthetic effect, 
tioasby as we " as to introduce into the study of the simpler 
German aesthetic forms the methods of natural science. The classic 
savants. work of Helmholtz on " Sensations of Tone " is a highly 
successful attempt to ground the known facts and laws of 
musical composition on physics and physiology. The endeavour to 
determine with a like degree of precision the physiological conditions 
of the pleasurable effects of colours and their combinations by 
E. VV. Briicke, Ewald Hering and more recent investigators, has so 
far failed to realize the desideratum laid down by Herbart, that 
there should be a theory of colour-relations equal in completeness 
and exactness to that of tone-relations. The experimental inquiry 
into simple aesthetically pleasing forms was begun by G. T. Fechner 
in seeking to test the soundness of Adolf Zeising's hypothesis that 
the most pleasing proportion in dividing a line, say the vertical part 
of a cross, is the " golden section," where the smaller division is to 
the larger as the latter to the sum. He describes in his work on 
" Experimental Aesthetics " (Zur experimentalen Asthetik) a series 
of experiments carried out on a large number ,of persons, bearing on 
this point, the results of which he considers to be infavour of Zeising's 
hypothesis. 

3. French Writers. — In France aesthetic speculation grew out of 
the discussion by poets and critics on the relation of modern art, and 
„ _ especially poetry, to ancient. The writings of Malherbe 
Afxo"/ anc * B°'' eau m the 17th century, the development of the 
* " dispute between the " ancients " and the " moderns " at 

concrete tne en ^ °^ tne I ' 7tn centurv by B. le Bouvier de Fontenelle 
problems. anc ^ Charles Perrault, and the continuation of the discus- 
sion as to the aims of poetry and of art generally in the 
1 8th century by Voltaire, Bayle, Diderot and others, not only offer 
to the modern theorists valuable material in the shape of a record by 
experts of their aesthetic experience, but disclose glimpses of im- 
portant aesthetic principles. A more systematic examination of 
the several arts (corresponding to that of Lessing) is to be found in 
the Cours de belles lettres of Charles Batteux (1765), in which the 
meaning and value of the imitation of nature by art are further 
elucidated, and the arts are classified (as by Lessing) according as 
they employ the forms of space or those of time. 

The beginning of a more scientific investigation of beauty in 
general is connected with the name of Pere Buffier (see First Truths, 
_. . English translation, 1780). He confines himself to organic 
o/onrante ^ orm ' an ^ illustrates his theory by the human face. A 
beauty. beautiful face is at once the most common and most rare 
Buffier. among members of the species. This seems to be a clumsy 
way of saying that it is a clear expression of the typical 
form of the species. This idea of typical beauty (which was adopted 



French 
systems 
aesthetics: 
The splri 
uallstes. 

developed 
beau). All 

Liv&que. 



by Reynolds) has been worked out more recently by H. Taine. In 
his work, The Ideal in Art (trans, by J. Durand), he proceeds in the 
manner of a botanist to determine a scale of characters Talne 

in the physical and moral man. The degree of the uni- 
versality or importance of a character, and of its beneficence or 
adaptation to the ends of life, determine the measure of its aesthetic 
value, and render the work of art, which seeks to represent it in its 
purity, an ideal work. 

The only elaborated systems of aesthetics in French literature 
are those constructed by the spiritualistes, the philosophic writers 
who under the influence of German thinkers effected a 
reaction against the crude sensationalism of the 18th ' . 

century. They aim at elucidating the higher and spiritual J^ jw/ c °. 
element in aesthetic impressions, appearing to ignore any ~ Be SD ; r /^.' 
capability in the sensuous material of affording a true 
aesthetic delight. V. Cousin and Jean Charles Levgque 
are the principal writers of this school. The latte 
an elaborate system of the subject (La Science du 
beauty is regarded as spiritual in its nature. The 
several beautiful characters of an organic body — of which 
the principal are magnitude, unity and variety of parts, intensity 
of colour, grace or flexibility, and correspondence to environment — 
may be brought under the conception of the ideal grandeur and 
order of the species. These are perceived by reason to be the mani- 
festations of an invisible vital force. Similarly the beauties of in- 
organic nature are to be viewed as the grand and orderly displays 
of an immaterial physical force. Thus all beauty is in its objective 
essence either spirit or unconscious force acting with fulness and in 
order. 

4. English Writers. — There is nothing answering to the German 
conception of a system of aesthetics in English literature. The 
inquiries of English thinkers have been directed for the most part 
to such modest problems as the psychological process by which we 
perceive the beautiful — discussions which are apt to be regarded by 
German historians as devoid of real philosophical value. The writers 
may be conveniently arranged in two divisions, answering to the two 
opposed directions of English thought : (1) the Intuitionalists, those 
who recognize the existence of an objective beauty which is a simple 
unanalysable attribute or principle of things; and (2) the Analytical 
theorists, those who follow the analytical and psychological method, 
concerning themselves with the sentiment of beauty as a complex 
growth out of simpler elements. 

Shaftesbury is the first of the intuitional writers on beauty. In 
his Characteristics the beautiful and the good are combined in one 
ideal conception, much as with Plato. Matter in itself is 
ugly. The order of the world, wherein all beauty really 
resides, is a spiritual principle, all motion and life being the 
product of spirit. The principle of beauty is perceived 
not with the outer sense, but with an internal or moral 
sense which apprehends the good as well. This perception yields the 
only true delight, namely, spiritual enjoyment. 

Francis Hutcheson, in his System of Moral Philosophy, though he 
adopts many of Shaftesbury's ideas, distinctly disclaims any inde- 
pendent self-existing beauty in objects. " All beauty," he Hutche- 
says, " is relative to the sense of some mind perceiving it." son> 
The cause of beauty is to be found not in a simple sensa- 
tion such as colour or tone, but in a certain order among the parts, or 
" uniformity amidst variety." The faculty by which this principle 
is discerned is an internal sense which is defined as " a passive power 
of receiving ideas of beauty from all objects in which there is 
uniformity in variety." This inner sense resembles the external 
senses in the immediateness of the pleasure which its activity brings ; 
and further in the necessity of its impressions: a beautiful thing 
being always, whether we will or no, beautiful. He distinguishes 
two kinds of beauty, absolute or original, and relative or compara- 
tive. The latter is discerned in an object which is regarded as an 
imitation or semblance of another. He distinctly states that " an 
exact imitation may still be beautiful though the original were 
entirely devoid of it." He seeks to prove the universality of this 
sense of beauty, by showing that all men, in proportion to the enlarge- 
ment of their intellectual capacity, are more delighted with uni- 
formity than the opposite. 

In his Essays on the Intellectual Powers (viii. " Of Taste ") Thomas 
Reid applies his principle of common sense to the problem of beauty 
by saying that objects of beauty agree not only in pro- Reid. 

during a certain agreeable emotion, but in the excitation 
along with this emotion of a belief that they possess some perfection 
or excellence, that beauty exists in the objects independently of 
our minds. His theory of beauty is severely spiritual. All beauty 
resides primarily in the faculties of the mind, intellectual and moral. 
The beauty which is spread over the face of visible nature is an 
emanation from this spiritual beauty, and is beauty because it sym- 
bolizes and expresses the latter. Thus the beauty of a plant resides 
in its perfect adaptation to its end, a perfection which is an expres- 
sion of the wisdom of its Creator. 

In his Lectures on Metaphysics Sir W. Hamilton gives a short 
account of the- sentiments of taste, which (with a superficial resem- 
blance to Kant) he regards as subserving both the sub- n am ;iton. 
sidiary and the elaborative faculties in cognition, that is, 
the imagination and the understanding. The activity 



The Intui- 
tionalists. 
Shaftes- 
bury. 



of the 



288 



AESTHETICS 



former corresponds to the element of variety in a beautiful object, 
that of the latter with its unity. He explicitly excludes all other 
kinds of pleasure, such as the sensuous, from the proper gratification 
of beauty. He denies that the attribute of beauty belongs to fitness. 

John Ruskin's well-known speculations on the nature of beauty 
in Modern Painters (" Of ideas of beauty "), though sadly wanting in 
Ruskln. scientific precision, have a certain value in the history of 
aesthetics. For him beauty is spiritual and typical of 
di\ine attributes. Its true nature is appreciated by the theoretic 
faculty which is concerned in the moral conception and apprecia- 
tion of ideas of beauty, and must be distinguished from the imagina- 
tive or artistic faculty, which is employed in regarding in a certain 
way and combining the ideas received from external nature. He 
distinguishes between typical and vital beauty. The former is the 
external quality of bodies which typifies some divine attribute. The 
latter consists in " the appearance of felicitous fulfilment of function 
in living things." The forms of typical beauty are: — (i) infinity, 
the type of the divine incomprehensibility ; (2) unity, the type of the 
divine comprehensiveness; (3) repose, the type of the divine per- 
manence; (4) symmetry, the type of the divine justice; (5) purity, 
the type of the divine energy; and (6) moderation, the type of 
government by law. Vital beauty, again, is regarded as relative 
when the degree of exaltation of the function is estimated, or generic 
if only the degree of conformity of an individual to the appointed 
functions of the species is taken into account. Ruskin's writings 
illustrate the extreme tendency to identify aesthetic with moral 
perception. 

Addison's " Essays on the Imagination," contributed to the 
Spectator, though they belong to popular literature, contain the germ 
The °^ sc ' en tific analysis in the statement that the pleasures 

analytical °^ imagination (which arise originally from sight) fall into 
theorists, two'blasses : — (1) primary pleasures, which entirely pro- 
Addlson. ceed from objects before our eyes; and (2) secondary 
pleasures, flowing from the ideas of visible objects. The 
latter are greatly extended by the addition of the proper enjoyment 
of resemblance, which is at the basis of all mimicry and wit. Addison 
recognizes, too, to some extent, the influence of association upon 
our aesthetic preferences. 

In the Elements of Criticism of Home (Lord Karnes) another at- 
tempt is made to resolve the pleasure of beauty into its elements. 
Home Beauty and ugliness are simply the pleasant and un- 

pleasant in the higher senses of sight and hearing. He 
appears to admit no general characteristic of beautiful objects 
beyond this power of yielding pleasure. Like Hutcheson, he divides 
beauty into intrinsic and relative, but understands by the latter the 
appearance of fitness and utility, which is excluded from the beautiful 
by Hutcheson. 

Passing by the name of Sir Joshua Reynolds, whose theory of 
beauty closely resembles that of Pere Buffier, we come to the 
Hovarth speculations of anotherartist and painter, William Hogarth . 
' He discusses, in his Analysis of Beauty, all the elements of 
visual beauty. He finds in this the following elements: — (1) fitness 
of the parts to some design; (2) variety in as many ways as possible; 
(3) uniformity, regularity or symmetry, which is only beautiful 
when it helps to preserve the character of fitness; (4) simplicity or 
distinctness, which gives pleasure not in itself, but through its 
enabling the eye to enjoy variety with ease; (5) intricacy, which 
provides employment for our active energies, ieading the eye " a 
wanton kind of chase "; (6) quantity or magnitude, which draws 
our attention and produces admiration and awe. The beauty of 
proportion he resolves into the needs of fitness. Hogarth applies 
these principles to the determination of the degrees of beauty in 
lines, figures and groups of forms. Among lines he singles out for 
special honour the serpentine (formed by drawing a line once round 
from the base to the apex of a long slender cone). 

Burke's speculations, in his Inquiry into the Origin of our Ideas of 
the Sublime and Beautiful, illustrate the tendency of English writers 
„ . to treat the problem as a psychological one and to intro- 

ur e ' duce physiological considerations. He finds the elements 
of beauty to be : — (1) smallness; (2) smoothness; (3) gradual variation 
of direction in gentle curves; (4) delicacy, or the appearance of 
fragility: (5) brightness, purity and softness of colour. The sublime 
is rather crudely resolved into astonishment, which he thinks always 
contains an element of terror. Thus " infinity has a tendency to 
fill the mind with a delightful horror." Burke seeks what he calls 
" efficient causes " for these aesthetic impressions incertain affections 
of the nerves of sight analogous to those of other senses, namely, 
the soothing effect of a relaxation of the nerve fibres. The arbitrari- 
ness and narrowness of this theory cannot well escape the reader's 
attention. 

Alison, in his well-known Essays on the Nature and Principles of 

Taste, proceeds by a method exactly the opposite to that of Hogarth 

and Burke. He seeks to analyse the mental process when 

son. wg eX p er ; ence t h e emotion of beauty or sublimity. He 
finds that this consists in a peculiar operation of the imagination, 
namely, the flow of a train of ideas through the mind, which ideas 
always correspond to some simple affection or emotion (e.g. cheer- 
fulness, sadness, awe) awakened by the object. He thus makes 
association the sole source of aesthetic delight, and denies the exist- 
ence of a primary source in sensations themselves. He illustrates 



the working of the principle of association at great length, and with 
much skill ; yet his attempt to make it the unique source of aesthetic 
pleasure fails completely. Francis Jeffrey's Essays on Beauty (in 
the Edinburgh Review, and Encyclopaedia Britannica, 8th edition) are 
little more than a modification of Alison's theory. 

D. Stewart's chief contribution to aesthetic discussion in his 
Philosophical Essays consists in pointing out the unwarranted 
assumption lurking in the doctrine of a single quality oagald 
running through all varieties of beautiful object. He seeks Stewart. 
to show how the successive changes in the meaning of the 
term " beautiful "have arisen. He suggests that it originally connoted 
the pleasure of colour. The value of his discussion resides more in 
the criticism of his predecessors than in the contribution of new 
ideas. His conception of the sublime, suggested by the etymology 
of the word, emphasizes the element of height in objects. 

Of the association psychologists James Mill did little more towards 
the analysis of the sentiments of beauty than re-state Alison's doc- 
trine. Alexander Bain, in his treatise, The Emotions and Bain. 
the Will (" Aesthetic Emotions ") , carries this examination 
considerably further. He seeks to differentiate aesthetic from other 
varieties of pleasurable emotion by three characteristics; — (1) their 
freedom from life-serving uses, being gratifications sought for their 
own sakes; (2) their purity from all disagreeable concomitants; 
(3) their eminently sympathetic or shareable nature. He takes a 
comprehensive view of the constituents of aesthetic enjoyment, in- 
cluding the pleasures of sensation and of its revived or its " ideal " 
form; of revived emotional states; and lastly the satisfaction of 
those wide-ranging susceptibilities which we call thelove of novelty, 
of contrast and of harmony. The effect of sublimity is connected 
with the manifestation of superior power in its highest degrees, 
which manifestation excites a sympathetic elation in the beholder. 
The ludicrous, again, is defined by Bain, improving on Aristotle 
and Hobbes, as the degradation of something possessing dignity in 
circumstances that excite no other strong emotion. 

Herbert Spencer, in his First Principles, Principles of Psychology 
and Essays, has given an interesting turn to the psychology of 
aesthetics by the application of his doctrine of evolution. Adopting 
Schiller's idea of a connexion between aesthetic activity Herbert 
and play, he seeks to make it the starting-point in tracing Spencer. 
the evolution of aesthetic activity. Play is defined as the 
outcome of the superfluous energies of the organism : as the activity 
of organs and faculties which, owing to a prolonged period of in- 
activity, have become specially ready to discharge their function, and 
as a consequence vent themselves in simulated actions. Aesthetic 
activities supply a similar mode of self-relieving discharge to the 
higher organs of perception and emotion; and they further^ agree 
with play in not directly subserving any processes conducive to 
life ; in being gratifications sought for their own sake only. Spencer 
seeks to construct a hierarchy of aesthetic pleasures according to 
the degree of complexity of the faculty exercised: from those of 
sensation up to the revived emotional experiences which constitute 
the aesthetic sentiment proper. Among the more vaguely revived 
emotions Spencer includes more permanent feelings of the race 
transmitted by heredity ; as when he refers the deep and indefinable 
emotion excited by music to associations with vocal tones expressive 
of feeling built up during the past history of ourspecies. His bio- 
logical treatment of aesthetic activity has had a wide influence, some 
(e.g. Grant Allen) being content to develop his evolutional method. 
Yet, as suggested above, his theory is now recognized as taking us 
only a little way towards an adequate understanding of our aesthetic 
experience. 

Bibliography. 1 — (a) Works on General Aesthetics. 

English and American.— There are no important recent works 
which deal with the whole subject. The following will be found 
helpful : Herbert Spencer, Principles of Psychology, pt. viii. c. 9, 
"Aesthetic Sentiments," and the papers on "Use and Beauty," 
" Origin and Function of Music " and others in the Essays; A. Bain, 
Emotions and Will, "Aesthetic Emotions"; J. Sully, Human 
Mind, ii. "Aesthetic Sentiment"; Grant Allen, "Physiological 
Aesthetics" (Meth., PI., Senses, Play); Rutgers Marshall, Pain, 
Pleasure and Aesthetics, and Aesthetic Principles (Meth., PI., Play). 

French and Italian Works. — M. Guyau, Les Problemes de I' esthetique 
contemporaine (1884) (PI., Play) ; E. Veron, L 'Esthetique (1890) (slight 
PL); L. Bray, Du Beau (1002I. (PI., Play) ; P. Saurian, Li Beaute 
rationnelle (1904) (Meth., PI., Senses, Einf.) ; M. Pilo, Estetica (PI., 
Senses); A. Rolla, Storia delle idee esteliche in Italia (1905) (full 
account of ideas of Dante and other medieval writers, as well as of 
modern systems). 

German Works. — K. Kostlin, Prolegomena zur Asthetik (1889) 

1 Only recent works are included. Important points in each are 
indicated by abbreviations, namely : — 
Einf., for Einfuhlung (cxpres- PI., for theory of pleasure. 

sional element in form). Play, for Play and aesthetic 

Evol., for bearings of evolution. enjoyment. 
111., for aesthetic illusion. Senses, for aesthetic value of 

Judg., for aesthetic judgment. higher senses. 

Meth., for method of aesthetics. Val., for aesthetic value. 
Norm., for normative function of 

aesthetics. 



AESTIVATION— ^THELFRITH 



289 



(good introduction to subject) ; K. Groos, Der asthetische Genuss 
(1902) (Meth., Judg., Play, Senses, Einf. and 111.) ; J. Volkelt, System 
der Asthetik (1905) (very full and clear) (Meth., Norm., Evol., Senses, 
Einf.); J. Cohn, Allgemeine Asthetik (1901) (Val., Play, Einf.); K. 
Lange, Das Wesen der Kunst (1901) (Meth., Einf., 111., Play). 

(b) Works' on History oj Aesthetics. — H. Lotze, Geschichte der 
Asthetik in Deutschland; M. Schasler, Kritische Geschichte der 
Asthetik (full and elaborate, dealing with ancient and modern 
theories) ; E. von Hartmann, Die deutsche Asthetik seit Kant 
(Ausgewahlte Werke, iii.) ; K. H. von Stein, Die Entstehung der 
neueren Asthetik (theories of French critics, &c.) ; F. Brunetiere, 
V Evolution des genres (History of critical discussions in the 17th 
and 1 8th centuries); B. Bosanquet, History of Aesthetics (very full, 
especially on ancient theories and German systems) ; W. Knight, 
Philosophy of the Beautiful, pt. i. " History " (Univ. Extension 
Manuals, a popular resume with quotations). (J. S.) 

AESTIVATION (from Lat. aestivare, to spend the aestas, or 
summer; the word is sometimes spelled " estivation"), literally 
" summer residence," a term used in zoology for the condition 
of torpor into which certain animals pass during the hottest 
season in hot and dry countries, contrasted with the similar 
winter condition known as hibernation (q.v.). In botany the 
word is used of the praefloration or folded arrangement of the 
petals in a flower before expansion in the summer, contrasted with 
" vernation " of leaves which unfold in the spring. 

A3THELBALD, king of Mercia, succeeded Ceoired a.d. 716. 
According to Felix, Life of St Guthlac, he visited the saint at 
Crowland, when exiled by Ceoired and pursued by his emissaries 
before his accessfon, and was cheered by predictions of his future 
greatness. According to Bede, the whole of Britain as far north 
as the Humber was included within the sphere of his authority. 
His energy in preserving his influence is shown by several entries 
in the Chronicle. He made an expedition against Wessex in 
733, in which year he took the royal vill of Somerton. In 740 
he took advantage of the absence of Eadberht of Northumbria 
in a campaign against the Picts to invade his kingdom. In 743 
he fought with Cuthred, king of Wessex, against the Welsh, but 
the alliance did not last long, as in 752 Cuthred took up arms 
against him. In 757 ^Ethelbald was slain by his guards at 
Seckington (Warwickshire) and buried at Repton. He seems to 
have been the most powerful and energetic king of Mercia be- 
tween Penda and Offa. A letter of St Boniface is preserved, 
in which he rebukes this king for his immoralities and encroach- 
ments on church property, while recognizing his merits as a 
monarch. By a charter of 749 he freed ecclesiastical lands from 
all obligations except the trinoda necessitas. 

See Bede, Hist. Ecc. (ed. Plummer), v. 23 and Continuatio s.a. 740, 
750, 757; Saxon Chronicle (Earle and Plummer), s.a. 716, 733, 737, 
740, 741, 743, 755; Mabillon, Acta Sanctorum, ii. pp. 264, 275, 276, 
2 79i 283-284; P. Jaffe, Monumenta Moguntiaca, iii. pp. 168-177; 
W. de G. Birch, Cartul. Saxon. 178 (1885-1893). (F. G. M. B.) 

JETHELBALD, king of Wessex, was the son of ^Ethelwulf, 
with whom he led the West Saxons to victory against the Danes 
at Aclea, 851. According to Asser he rebelled against his 
father on the latter's return from Rome in 856, and deprived 
him of Wessex, which he ruled until his death in 860. On his 
father's death in 858 he married his widow, Judith. 

See Asser, Life of Alfred (W. H. Stevenson, 1904), 12; Saxon 
Chronicle, s.a. 851, 855, 860. 

&THELBERHT, king of Kent, son of Eormenric, probably 
came to the throne in a.d. 560. The first recorded event of 
his reign was a serious reverse at the hands of Ceawlin of 
Wessex in the year 568 (Chronicle) at a place called Wibbandune. 
jEthelberht married Berhta, daughter of Charibert, king of Paris, 
who brought over Bishop Liudhard as her private confessor. 
According to Bede, j£thelberht's supremacy in 597 stretched 
over all the English kingdoms as far as the Humber. The nature 
of this supremacy has been much disputed, but it was at any 
rate sufficient to guarantee the safety of Augustine in his con- 
ference with the British bishops. jEthelberht exercised a 
stricter sway over Essex, where his nephew Saberht was king. 
In 597 the mission of Augustine landed in Thanet and was re- 
ceived at first with some hesitation by the king. He seems to 
have acted with prudence and moderation during the conversion 
of his kingdom and did not countenance compulsory proselytism. 
jEthelberht gave Augustine a dwelling-place in Canterbury, and 
I. 10 



Christ Church was consecrated in 603. He also made grants to 
found the see of Rochester, of which Justus became first bishop 
in 604, and his influence established Mellitus at London in the 
same year. A code of laws issued* by him which is still extant 
is probably the oldest document in the English language, and 
contains a list of money fines for various crimes. Towards 
the close of his reign his pre-eminence as Bretwalda was dis- 
turbed by the increasing power of Raedwald of East Anglia. 
He died probably in 616, and was succeeded by his son Eadbald. 

See Bede, Hist. Ecc. (Plummer) i. 25, 26, ii. 3, 5; Saxon Chronicle 
(Earle and Plummer), s.a. 568. (F. G. M. B.) 

iETHELBERHT, king of the West Saxons, succeeded to the 
sub-kingdom of Kent during the lifetime of his father ^Ethelwulf , 
and retained it until the death of his elder brother ^Ethelbald in 
860, when he became sole king of Wessex and Kent, the younger 
brothers ^Ethelred and Alfred renouncing their claim. He ruled 
these kingdoms for five years and died in 865. His reign was 
marked by two serious attacks on the part of the Danes, who 
destroyed Winchester in 860, in spite of the resistance of the 
ealdormen Osric and /Ethelwulf with the levies of Hampshire 
and Berkshire, while in 865 they treacherously ravaged Kent. 

See Saxon Chronicle (Earle and Plummer), s.a. 860, 865; King 
Alfred's Will; W. de G. Birch, Cartul. Saxon. 553. 

ATHELFLAED (Ethelfleda), the " Lady of the Mercians," 
the eldest child of Alfred the Great, was educated with her 
brother Edward at her father's court. As soon as she was of 
marriageable age (probably about a.d. 886), she was married to 
^Ethelred, earl of Mercia, to whom Alfred entrusted the control 
of Mercia. On the accession of her brother Edward, ^Ethelflaed 
and her husband continued to hold Mercia. In 907 they fortified 
Chester, and in 909 and 910 either ^Ethelflaed or her husband 
must have led the Mercian host at the battles of Tettenhall and 
Wednesfield (or Tettenhall- Wednesfield, if these battles are one 
and the same). It was probably about this time that yEthelred 
fell ill, and the Norwegians and Danes from Ireland unsuccessfully 
besieged Chester, ^thelflaed won the support of the Danes 
against the Norwegians, and seems also to have entered into an 
alliance with the Scots and the Welsh against the pagans. In 
911 ^Ethelred died and Edward took over Middlesex and Oxford- 
shire. Except for this ^Ethelflaed's authority remained un- 
impaired. In 912 she fortified " Scergeat " and Bridgenorth, 
Tamworth and Stafford in 913, Eddisbury and Warwick in 914, 
Cherbury, " Weardbyrig " and Runcorn in 915. In 916 she sent 
an expedition against the Welsh, which advanced as far as 
Brecknock. In 917 Derby was captured from the Danes, and 
in the next year Leicester and York both submitted to her. 
She died in the same year at Tamworth (June 12), and was 
buried in St Peter's church at Gloucester. This noble queen, 
whose career was as distinguished as that of her father and 
brother, left one daughter, ^Elfwyn. For some eighteen months 
^Elfwyn seems to have wielded her mother's authority, and then, 
just before the Christmas of 919, Edward took Mercia into his 
own hands, and ;£lfwyn was " led away " into Wessex. ^Ethel- 
flaed and her husband wielded almost kingly authority, and the 
royal title is often given them by the chroniclers. 

See The Saxon Chronicle, sub ann. (especially the Mercian register 
in MSS. B, C and D) ; Florence of Worcester; Fragments of Irish 
Annals (ed. O'Conor), pp. 227-237; D.N.B., s.v. (A. Mw.) 

^THELFRITH, king of Northumbria, is said to have come 
to the throne in a.d. 593, being the son of ^Ethelric (probably 
reigned 568-572). He married Acha, daughter of Ella GElle), 
king of Deira, whom he succeeded probably in 605, expelling 
his son Edwin. In 603 he repelled the attack of Aidan, king of 
the Dalriad Scots, at Daegsastan, defeating him with great loss. 
The appearance of Hering, son of Hussa, ^Ethelfrith's prede- 
cessor, on the side of the invaders seems to indicate family 
quarrels in the royal house of Bernicia. Later in his reign, 
probably in 614, he defeated the Welsh in a great battle at 
Chester and massacred the monks of Bangor who were assembled 
to aid them by their prayers. This war may have been due 
partly to ^Ethelfrith's persecution of Edwin, but it had a stra- 
tegic importance in the separation of the North Welsh from the 
Strathclyde Britons. In 617 ^Ethelfrith was defeated and slain 

11 



290 



jETHELING— ^THELRED II. 



at the river Idle by Rsedwald of East Anglia, whom Edwin had 
persuaded to take up his cause. 

See Bede, Chronica Majora, § 531; Hist. Ecc. (Plummer) i. 34, 
ii. 2; Saxon Chronicle, s.a. 593, 603, 605, 616; Hist. Brittonum, 
§§57.63; Annales Cambriae, s.a. 613. (F. G. M. B.) 

.ffiTHELING, an Anglo-Saxon word compounded of athele, or 
ethel, meaning noble, and ing, belonging to, and akin to the 
modern German words Adel, nobility, and adelig, noble. During 
the earliest years of the Anglo-Saxon rule in England the word 
was probably used to denote any person of noble birth. Its 
use was, however, soon restricted to members of a royal family, 
and in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle it is used almost exclusively 
for members of the royal house of Wessex. It was occasionally 
used after the Norman Conquest to designate members of the 
royal family. The earlier part of the word formed part of the 
name of several Anglo-Saxon kings, e.g. ^Ethelbert, ^Ethelwulf, 
/Ethelred, and was used obviously to indicate their noble birth. 
According to a document which probably dates from the 10th 
century, the wergild of an aetheling was fixed at 15,000 thrymsas, 
or 1 1,250 shillings. This wergild is equal to that of an archbishop 
and one-half of that of a king. 

JSTHELNOTH (d. 1038), archbishop of Canterbury, known 
also as Egelnodus or Ednodus, was a son of the ealdorman 
^Ethelmaer, and a member of the royal family of Wessex. He 
became a monk at Glastonbury, then dean of the monastery of 
Christ Church,-- Canterbury, and chaplain to King Canute, and 
on the 13th of November 1020 was consecrated archbishop of 
Canterbury. In 1022 he went to Rome to obtain the pallium, 
and was received with great respect by Pope Benedict VIII. 
Returning from Rome he purchased at Pavia a relic said to 
be an arm of St Augustine of Hippo, for a hundred talents of 
silver and one of gold, and presented it to the abbey of Coventry. 
He appears to have exercised considerable influence over Canute, 
largely by whose aid he restored his cathedral at Canterbury. 
A story of doubtful authenticity tells how he refused to crown 
King Harold I., as he had promised Canute to crown none but a 
son of the king by his wife, Emma. ^Ethelnoth, who was called 
the " Good," died on the 29th of October 1038, and his name 
appears in the lists of saints. 

JETHELRED, king of Mercia, succeeded his brother Wulfhere 
in a.d. 675. In 676 he ravaged Kent with fire and sword, 
destroying the monasteries and churches and taking Rochester. 
iEthelred married Osthryth, the sister of Ecgfrith, king of 
Northumbria, but in spite of this connexion a quarrel arose 
between the two kings, presumably over the possession of the 
province of Lindsey, which Ecgfrith had won back at the close 
of the reign of Wulfhere. In a battle on the banks of the Trent 
in 679, the king of Mercia was victorious and regained the 
province. ^Elfwine, the brother of Ecgfrith, was slain on this 
occasion, but at the intervention of Theodore, archbishop of 
Canterbury, /Ethelred agreed to pay a wergild for the North- 
umbrian prince and so prevented further hostilities. Osthryth 
was murdered in 697 and ^Ethelred abdicated in 704, choosing 
Ccenred as his successor. He then became abbot of Bardney, 
and, according to Eddius, recommended Wilfrid to Ccenred on 
his return from Rome. ^Ethelred died at Bardney in 716. (See 
Wilfrid.) 

Sources. — Eddius, Vita Wilfridi (Raine), 23. 40, 43, 45-48, 57; 
Bede, Hist. Ecc. (ed. Plummer), iii. 11, iv. 12,21; Saxon Chronicle, 
s.a. 676, 679, 704, 716. (F. G. M. B.) 

.ffiTHELRED I., king of Wessex and Kent (866-871), was 
the fourth son of ^Ethelwulf of Wessex, and should, by his 
father's will, have succeeded to Wessex on the death of his eldest 
brother ^Ethelbald. He seems, however, to have stood aside in 
favour of his brother ^Ethelberht, king of Kent, to whose joint 
kingdoms he succeeded in 866. ^Ethelred's reign was one long 
struggle against the Danes. In the year of his succession a 
large Danish force landed in East Anglia, and in the year 868 
iEthelred and his brother Alfred went to help Burgred, or 
Burhred, of Mercia, against this host, but the Mercians soon 
made peace with their foes. In 871 the Danes encamped at 
Reading, where they defeated ^Ethelred and his brother, but 
later in the year the English won a great victory at " ^Escesdun." 



A fortnight later they were defeated at Basing, but partially 
retrieved their fortune by a victory at " Maeretun " (perhaps 
Marden in Wiltshire), though the Danes held the field. In the 
Easter of this year JEihehed died, perhaps of wounds received 
in the wars against the Danes, and was buried at Wimborne. 
He left a son, .Ethelwold, who gave some trouble to his cousin 
Edward the Elder, when the latter succeeded to the kingdom. 
^Ethelweard the historian was also a descendant of this king. 
Authorities. — The Saxon Chronicle, sub ann. ; Birch, Cartul. 
Saxon, vol. ii. Nos. 516-526; D.N.B., s.v.; Eng. Hist. Review, i. 
218-234. (A- Mw.) 

iETHELRED II. (or Ethelred) (c. 968-1016), king of the 
English (surnamed The Unready, i.e. without rede or counsel), 
son of King Edgar by his second wife ^Elfthryth, was born in 
968 or 969 and succeeded to the throne on the murder of his 
step-brother Edward (the Martyr) in 979. His reign was dis- 
astrous from the beginning. The year after his accession the 
Danish invasions, long unintermitted under Edgar the Peaceful, 
recommenced; though as yet their object was plunder only, 
not conquest, and the attacks were repeated in 981, 982 and 988. 
In 991 the Danes burned Ipswich, and defeated and slew the 
East Saxon ealdorman Brihtnoth at Maldon. After this, peace 
was purchased by a payment of £10,000 — a disastrous expedient. 
The Danes were .to desist from their ravages, but were allowed 
to stay in England. Next year /Ethelred himself broke the peace 
by an attack on the Danish ships. Despite the treachery of 
^Elfric, the English were victorious; and the Danes sailed off to 
ravage Lindsey and Northumbria. In 994 Olaf Tryggvason, 
king of Norway, and Sweyn, king of Denmark, united in a great 
invasion and attacked London. Foiled by the valour of the 
citizens, they sailed away and harried the coast from Essex to 
Hampshire. ^Ethelred now resorted to the old experiment 
and bought them off for £16,000 and a promise of supplies. 
Olaf also visited ^Ethelred at the latter's request and, receiving 
a most honourable welcome, was induced to promise that he 
would never again come to England with hostile intent, an en- 
gagement which he faithfully kept. The Danish attacks were 
repeated in 997, 998, 999, and in ioooyEthelred availed himself 
of the temporary absence of the Danes in Normandy to invade 
Cumberland, at that time a Viking stronghold. Next year, 
however, the Northmen returned and inflicted worse evil than 
ever. The national defence seemed to have broken down alto- 
gether. In despair ^Ethelred again offered them money, which 
they again accepted, the sum paid on this occasion being £24,000. 
But soon afterwards the king, suspecting treachery, resolved to 
get rid of his enemies once and for all. Orders were issued 
commanding the slaughter on St Brice's day (December 2) of 
" all the Danish men who were in England." Such a decree 
could obviously not be carried out literally; but we cannot 
doubt that the slaughter was great. This violence, however, 
only made matters worse. Next year Sweyn returned, his 
hostility fanned by the desire for revenge. For two years he 
ravaged and slew; in 1003 Exeter was destroyed; Norwich 
and Thetford in 1004. No effectual resistance was offered, 
despite a gallant effort here and there; the disorganization of 
the country was complete. In 1005 the Danes were absent in 
Denmark, but came back next year, and emboldened by the utter 
lack of resistance, they ranged far inland. In 1007 ^Ethelred 
bought them off for a larger sum than ever (£36,000), and for 
two years the land enjoyed peace. In 1009, however, in accord- 
ance with a resolution made by the witan in the preceding year, 
^Ethelred collected such a fleet " as never before had been in 
England in any king's day"; but owing to a miserable court 
quarrel the effort came to nothing. The king then summoned 
a general levy of the nation, with no better result, just as he 
was about to attack, the traitor Edric prevented him from doing 
so, and the opportunity was lost. In 1010 the Danes returned, 
to find the kingdom more utterly disorganized than ever. " There 
was not a chief man in the kingdom who could gather a force, 
but each fled as he best might; nor even at last would any there 
resist another." Incapable of offering resistance, the king again 
offered money, this time no less than £48,000. While it was being 



^THELSTAN— ^THELWEARD 



291 



collected, the Danes sacked Canterbury and barbarously slew 
the archbishop Alphege. The tribute was paid soon afterwards; 
and about the same time the Danish leader Thurkill entered the 
English service. From 1013 an important change is discernible 
in the character of the Danish attacks, which now became 
definitely political in their aim. In this year Sweyn sailed up 
the Trent and received the submission of northern England, 
and then marching south, he attacked London. Failing to take 
it, he hastened west and at Bath received the submission of 
Wessex. Then he returned northwards, and after that " all the 
nation considered him as full king." London soon acknowledged 
him, and ^Ethelred, after taking refuge for a while with Thurkill's 
fleet, escaped to Normandy. Sweyn died in February 1014, 
and ^thelred was recalled by the witan, on giving a promise 
to reign better in future. At once he hastened north against 
Canute, Sweyn's son, who claimed to succeed his father, but 
Canute sailed away, only to return next year, when the traitor 
Edric joined him and Wessex submitted. Together Canute and 
Edric harried Mercia, and were preparing to reduce London, 
when ^Ethclred died there on the 23rd of April 1016. Weak, 
self-indulgent, improvident, he had pursued a policy of oppor- 
tunism to a fatal conclusion. 

jEthelred's wife was Emma, or /Elfgifu, daughter of Richard I. 
the Fearless, duke of the Normans, whom he married in 1002. 
After the king's death Emma became the wife of Canute the 
Great, and after his death in 1035 she struggled hard to secure 
England for her son, Hardicanute. In 1037, however, when 
Harold Harefoot became sole king, she was banished; she went 
to Flanders, returning to England with Hardicanute in 1040. 
In 1043, after Edward the Confessor had become king he seized 
the greater part of Emma's great wealth, and the queen lived 
in retirement at Winchester until her death on the 6th of March 
1052. By ./Ethelred Emma had two sons, Edward the Confessor 
and the setheling ^Elfred (d. 1036), and by Canute she was the 
mother of Hardicanute. Emma's marriage with ^Ethelred was 
an important step in the history of the relations between 
England and Normandy, and J. R. Green says " it suddenly 
opened for its rulers a distinct policy, a distinct course of 
action, which led to the Norman conquest of England. From 
the moment of Emma's marriage Normandy became a chief 
factor in English politics." 

Authorities. — The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle (edition by C. 
Plummer, 2 vols. Oxford, 1892-1899); Florence of Worcester (ed. B. 
Thorpe, London, 1 848-1 849) ; Encomium Emmae (ed. by G. H. Pertz 
in the Scriptores Rerum Germanicarum, Band xix., Hanover, 1866) 
for the latter part of the reign. See also J. M. Kemble, Codex Diplo- 
maticus acvi Saxonici (London, 1839-1848); and B. Thorpe, Ancient 
Laws (London, 1840). (C. S. P.*) 

^THELSTAN (c. 804-940), Saxon king, was the son 
(probably illegitimate) of Edward the elder. He had been the 
favourite of his grandfather Alfred, and was brought up in the 
household of his aunt ^thelflaed, the " Lady of the Mercians." 
On the death of his father in 924, at some date after the 12th 
of November, ^Ethelstan succeeded him and was crowned at 
Kingston shortly after. The succession did not, however, take 
place without opposition. One Alfred, probably a descendant 
of jEthelred I., formed a plot to seize the king at Winchester; 
the plot was discovered and Alfred was sent to Rome to defend 
himself, but died shortly after. The king's own legitimate 
brother Edwin made no attempt on the throne, but in 933 he 
was drowned at sea under somewhat mysterious circumstances; 
the later chroniclers ascribe his death to foul play on the part 
of the king, but this seems more than doubtful. 

One of jEthelstan's first public acts was to hold a conference 
at Tamworth with Sihtric, the Scandinavian king of Northumbria, 
and as a result Sihtric received /Ethelstan's sister in marriage. 
In the next year Sihtric died and ^Ethelstan took over the 
Northumbrian kingdom. He now received, at Dacre in Cumber- 
land, the submission of all the kings of the island, viz. Howel Dda, 
king of West Wales, Owen, king of Cumbria, Constantine, king 
of the Scots, and Ealdred of Bamburgh, and henceforth he calls 
himself "rex totius Britanniae." About this time (the exact 
chronology is uncertain) ^Ethelstan expelled Sihtric's brother 



Guthfrith, destroyed the Danish fortress at York, received the 
submission of the Welsh at Hereford, fixing their boundary along 
the line of the Wye, and drove the Cornishmen west of the Tamar, 
fortifying Exeter as an English city. 

In 934 he invaded Scotland by land and sea, perhaps owing 
to an alliance between Constantine and Anlaf Sihtricsson. ' The 
army advanced as far north as Dunottar, in Kincardineshire, 
while the navy sailed to Caithness. Simeon of Durham speaks 
of a submission of Scotland as a result; if it ever took place it 
was a mere form, for three years later we find a great confederacy 
formed in Scotland against /Ethelstan. This confederacy of 
937 was joined by Constantine, king of Scotland, the Welsh of 
Strathclyde, and the Norwegian chieftains Anlaf Sihtricsson 
and Anlaf Godfredsson, who, though they came from Ireland, 
had powerful English connexions. A great battle was fought 
at Brunanburh (perhaps Brunswark or Birrenswark hill in S.E. 
Dumfriesshire) , in which ^Ethelstan and his brother Edmund were 
completely victorious. England had been freed from its greatest 
danger since the days of the struggle of Alfred against Guthrum. 

^Ethelstan was the first Saxon king who could claim in any 
real sense to be lord paramount of Britain. In his charters he 
is continually called " rex totius Britanniae," and he adopts for 
the first time the Greek title basileus. This was not merely an 
idle flourish, for some of his charters are signed by Welsh and 
Scottish kings as subreguli. Further, ^Ethelstan was the first 
king to bring England into close touch with continental Europe. 
By the marriage of his half-sisters he was brought into connexion 
with the chief royal and princely houses of France and_ Germany. 
His sister Eadgifu married Charles the Simple, Eadhild became 
the wife of Hugh the Great, duke of France, Eadgyth was 
married to the emperor Otto the Great, and her sister ^Elfgifu to 
a petty German prince. Embassies passed between ^Ethelstan 
and Harold Fairhair, first king of Norway, with the result 
that Harold's son Haakon was brought up in England and is 
known in Scandinavian history as Haakon Adalsteinsf6stri. 

yEthelstan died at Gloucester in 940, and was buried at Malmes- 
bury, an abbey which he had munificently endowed during his 
lifetime. Apparently he was never married, and he certainly 
had no issue. 

A considerable body of law has come down to us in ^Ethel- 
stan's name. The chief collections are those issued at Grately in 
Hampshire, at Exeter, at Thunresfeld, and the Judicia civitatis 
Lundonie. In the last-named one personal touch is found when 
the king tells the archbishop how grievous it is to put to death 
persons of twelve winters for stealing. The king secured the 
raising of the age limit to fifteen. 

Authorities. — Primary : The Saxon Chronicle, sub ann. ; William 
of Malmesbury, Gesta Regum, i. 141-157, Rolls Series, contain- 
ing valuable original information (v. Stubbs' Introduction, II. lx.- 
lxvii.) ; Birch, Cartul. Saxon, vol. ii. Nos. 641-747; A.S. Laws, 
(ed. Liebermann), i. 146-183; iFthelweard, Florence of Worcester. 
Secondary: Saxon Chronicle (ed. Plummer), vol. ii. pp. 132-142; 
D.N.B., s.v. (A. Mw.) 

&THELWEARD (Ethelward), Anglo-Saxon historian, was 
the great-grandson of yEthelred, the brother of Alfred, and 
ealdorman or earl of the western provinces (i.e. probably of the 
whole of Wessex). He first signs as dux or ealdorman in 973, 
and continues to sign until 998, about which time his death 
must have taken place. In the year 991 he was associated with 
archbishop Sigeric in the conclusion of a peace with the victorious 
Danes from Maldon, and in 994 he was sent with Bishop ^lfheah 
(Alphege) of Winchester to make peace with Olaf at Andover. 
iEthelweard was the author of a Latin Chronicle extending to 
the year 975. Up to the year 892 he is largely dependent on 
the Saxon Chronicle, with a few details of his own; later he is 
largely independent of it. jEthelweard gave himself the bom- 
bastic title " Patricius Consul Quaestor Ethelwerdus," and un- 
fortunately this title is only too characteristic of the man. 
His narrative is highly rhetorical, and as he at the same time 
attempts more than Tacitean brevity his narrative is often 
very obscure. .^thelweard was the friend and patron of iElfric 
the grammarian. 

Authorities. — Primary: The Saxon Chronicle, 994 E; Birch, 



292 



^THELWULF— AETHER 



Cartularium Saxonicum; A.S. Laws (ed. Liebermann), pp. 220-224; 
Fabii Ethelwerdi Ckron., Mon. Hist. Brit. 449-454. Secondary: 
Plummer, Saxon Chronicle, vol. ii. p. ci. ; Napier and Stevenson, 
Crawford Charters, pp. 118-120; D.N.B., s.v. (A. Mw.) 

^THELWULF, king of the West Saxons, succeeded his father 
Ecgberht in a.d. 839. It is recorded in the Saxon Chronicle for 
S23 that he was sent with Eahlstan, bishop of Sherborne, and 
the ealdorman Wulfheard to drive out Baldred, king of Kent, 
which was successfully accomplished. On the accession of 
.Ethelwulf, iEthelstan, his son or brother, was made sub-king of 
Kent, Surrey, Sussex and Essex. ^Ethelwulf's reign was chiefly 
occupied with struggles against the Danes. After the king's 
defeat 843-844, the Somerset and Dorset levies won a victory at 
the mouth of the Parret, c. 850. In 851 Ceorl, with the men of 
Devon, defeated the Danes at Wigganburg, and JSthelstan of 
Kent was victorious at Sandwich, in spite of which they wintered 
in England that year for the first time. In 851 also ^Ethelwulf 
and ^Ethelbald won their great victory at Aclea, probably the 
modern Ockley. In 853 ^Ethelwulf subdued the North Welsh, 
in answer to the appeal of Burgred of Mercia, and gave him his 
daughter ^Ethelswith in marriage. 855 is the year of the Dona- 
tion of ^Ethelwulf and of his journey to Rome with Alfred. On 
his way home he married Judith, daughter of Charles the Bald. 
According to Asser he was compelled to give up Wessex to his 
son jEthelbald on his return, and content himself with the 
eastern sub-kingdom. He died in 858. 

See Asser, Life of Alfred (W. H. Stevenson, 1904), 1-16; Saxon 
Chronicle, s.a. 823, 836, 840, 851, 853, 855. (F. G. M. B.) 

AETHER, or Ether (Gr. cddvp, probably from <h0w, I burn, 
though Plato in his Cratylus (410 b) derives the name from 
its perpetual motion — on ad 6ei irepl rbv aepa pkuv, aeidefip 
diKalws av koKoZto), a material substance of a more subtle 
kind than visible bodies, supposed to exist in those parts of 
space which are apparently empty. 

" The hypothesis of an aether has been maintained by different 
speculators for very different reasons. To those who maintained 
the existence of a plenum as a philosophical principle, nature's 
abhorrence of a vacuum was a sufficient reason for imagining 
an all-surrounding aether, even though every other argument 
should be against it. To Descartes, who made extension the 
sole essential property of matter, and matter a necessary condi- 
tion of extension, the bare existence of bodies apparently at a 
distance was a proof of the existence of a continuous medium 
between them. But besides these high metaphysical necessities 
for a medium, there were more mundane uses to be fulfilled by 
aethers. Aethers were invented for the planets to swim in, to 
constitute electric atmospheres and magnetic effluvia, to convey 
sensations from one part of our bodies to another, and so on, 
till all space had been filled three or four times over with aethers. 
It is only when we remember the extensive and mischievous 
influence on science which hypotheses about aethers used for- 
merly to exercise, that we can appreciate the horror of aethers 
which sober-minded men had during the 18th century, and 
which, probably as a sort of hereditary prejudice, descended 
even to John Stuart Mill. The disciples of Newton maintained 
that in the fact of the mutual gravitation of the heavenly bodies, 
according to Newton's law, they had a complete quantitative 
account of their motions; and they endeavoured to follow out 
the path which Newton had opened up by investigating and 
measuring the attractions and repulsions of electrified and 
magnetic bodies, and the cohesive forces in the interior of 
bodies, without attempting to account for these forces. Newton 
himself, however, endeavoured to account for gravitation by 
differences of pressure in an aether; but he did not publish his 
theory, ' because he was not able from experiment and observa- 
tion to give a satisfactory account of this medium, and the 
manner of its operation in producing the chief phenomena of 
nature.' On the other hand, those who imagined aethers in 
order to explain phenomena could not specify the nature of the 
motion of these media, and could not prove that the media, as 
imagined by them, would produce the effects they were meant to 
explain. The only aether which has survived is that which was 
invented by Huygens to explain the propagation of fight. The 



evidence for the existence of the luminiferous aether has accumu- 
lated as additional phenomena of light and other radiations 
have been discovered; and the properties of this medium, as 
deduced from the phenomena of light, have been found to be 
precisely those required to explain electromagnetic phenomena." 

This description, quoted from James Clerk Maxwell's article 
in the 9th edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica, represents the 
historical position of the subject up till about i860, when Maxwell 
began those constructive speculations in electrical theory, based 
on the influence of the physical views of Faraday and Lord Kelvin, 
which have in their subsequent development largely transformed 
theoretical physics into the science of the aether. 

In the remainder of the article referred to, Maxwell reviews 
the evidence for the necessity of an aether, from the fact that 
light takes time to travel, while it cannot travel as a substance, 
for if so two interfering lights could not mask each other in the 
dark fringes (see Interference of Light). Light is therefore 
an influence propagated as wave-motion, and moreover by trans- 
verse undulations, for the reasons brought out by Thomas Young 
and Augustin Fresnel; so that the aether is a medium which 
possesses elasticity of a type analogous to rigidity. It must be 
very different from ordinary matter as we know it, for waves 
travelling in matter constitute sound, which is propagated 
hundreds of thousands of times slower than light. 

If we suppose that the aether differs from ordinary matter in 
degree but not in kind, we can obtain some idea of its quality 
from a knowledge of the velocity of radiation and of its possible 
intensity near the sun, in a manner applied long ago by Lord 
Kelvin (Trans. R. S. Edin. xxi. 1854). According to modern 
measurements the solar radiation imparts almost 3 gramme- 
calories of energy per minute per square centimetre at the 
distance of the earth, which is about 1-3 Xio 6 ergs per sec. per 
cm. 2 The energy in sunlight per cubic cm. just outside the 
earth's atmosphere is therefore about 4Xio~ 5 ergs; applying 
the law of inverse squares the value near the sun's surface would 
be i-8 ergs. Let E be the effective elasticity of the aether; 
then E = pc 2 , where p is its density, and c the velocity of light 
which is 3X10 l0 cm./sec. If £=a cos 11 (fi-xjc) is the linear 
vibration, the stress is E d£/dx; and the total energy, which is 
twice the kinetic energy Jp(d£/dt) 2 dx, is §p« 2 A 2 per cm., which 
is thus equal to i-8 ergs as above. Now \=2%cjn, so that 
if A/\=k, we have 3p(2xc&) 2 = i-8, giving p=io-**lr Jl and 
E = io -1 &-^. Lord Kelvin assumed as a superior limit of k, the 
ratio of amplitude to wave-length, the value io -2 , which is a 
very safe limit. It follows that the density of the aether must 
exceed io~ 18 , and its elastic modulus must exceed io 3 , which 
is only about io~ 8 of the modulus of rigidity of glass. It thus 
appears that if the amplitude of vibration could be as much as 
io -2 of the wave-length, the aether would be an excessively rare 
medium with very slight elasticity; and yet it would be capable 
of transmitting the supply of solar energy on which all terrestrial 
activity depends. But on the modern theory, which includes 
the play of electrical phenomena as a function of the aether, 
there are other considerations which show that this number io -2 
is really an enormous overestimate; and it is not impossible 
that the co-efficient of ultimate inertia of the aether is greater 
than the co-efficient of inertia (of different kind) of any existing 
material substance. 

The question of whether the aether is carried along by the 
earth's motion has been considered from the early days of the 
undulatory theory of light. In reviving that theory at the be- 
ginning of the 19th century, Thomas Young stated his conviction 
that material media offered an open structure to the substance 
called aether, which passed through them without hindrance 
" like the wind through a grove of trees." Any convection of 
that medium could be tested by the change of effective velocity 
of light, which would be revealed by a prism as was suggested 
by F. J. D. Arago. Before 1868 Maxwell conducted the experi- 
ment by sending light from the illuminated cross-wires of an 
observing telescope forward through the object-glass, and 
through a train of prisms, and then reflecting it back along the 
same path; any influence of convection would conspire in 



AETHER 



293 



altering both refractions, but yet no displacement of the image 
depending on the earth's motion was detected. As will be seen 
later, modern experiments have confirmed the entire absence of 
any effect, such as convection would produce, to very high 
precision. It has further been verified by Sir Oliver Lodge that 
even in very narrow spaces the aether is not entrained by its 
surroundings when they are put into rapid motion. 

A train of ideas which strongly impressed itself on Clerk 
Maxwell's mind, in the early stages of his theoretical views, 
was put forward by Lord Kelvin in 1858; he showed that the 
special characteristics of the rotation of the plane of polarization, 
discovered by Faraday in light propagated along a magnetic 
field, viz. that it is doubled instead of being undone when the 
light retraces its path, requires the operation of some directed 
agency of a rotational kind, which must be related to the 
magnetic field. Lord Kelvin was thereby induced to identify 
magnetic force with rotation, involving, therefore, angular 
momentum in the aether. Modern theory accepts the deduction, 
but ascribes the momentum to the revolving ions in the molecules 
of matter traversed by the light; for the magneto-optic effect 
is present only in material media. Long previously Lord Kelvin 
himself came nearer this view, in offering the opinion that 
magnetism consisted, in some way, in the angular momentum 
of the material molecules, of which the energy of irregular 
translations constitutes heat; but the essential idea of moving 
electric ions of both kinds, positive and negative, in the molecules 
had still to be introduced. 

The question of the transparency of the celestial spaces 
presents itself in the present connexion. Light from stars at 
unfathomable distances reaches us in such quantity as to suggest 
that space itself is absolutely transparent, leaving open the 
question as to whether there is enough matter scattered through 
it to absorb a sensible part of the light in its journey of years 
from the luminous body. If the aether were itself constituted 
of discrete molecules, on the model of material bodies, such 
transparency would not he conceivable. We must be content 
to treat the aether as a plenum, which places it in a class by 
itself; and we can thus recognize that it may behave very 
differently from matter, though in some manner consistent with 
itself — a remark which is fundamental in the modern theory. 

Action across a Distance contrasted with Transmitted Action. — 
In the mechanical processes which we can experimentally modify 
at will, and which therefore we learn to apprehend with greatest 
fulness, whenever an effect on a body, B, is in causal connexion 
with a process instituted in another body, A, it is usually possible 
to discover a mechanical connexion between the two bodies 
which allows the influence of A to be traced all the way across 
the intervening region. The question thus arises whether, in 
electric attractions across apparently empty space and in gravi- 
tational attraction across the celestial regions, we are invited 
or required to make search for some similar method of continuous 
transmission of the physical effect, or whether we should rest 
content with an exact knowledge of the laws according to which 
one body affects mechanically another body at a distance. 
The view that our knowledge in such cases may be completely 
represented by means of laws of action at a distance, expressible 
in terms of the positions (and possibly motions) of the interacting 
bodies without taking any heed of the intervening space, belongs 
to modern times. It could hardly have been thought of before 
Sir Isaac Newton's discovery of the actual facts regarding uni- 
versal gravitation. Although, however, gravitation has formed 
the most perfect instance of an influence completely expressible, 
up to the most extreme refinement of accuracy, in terms of laws 
of direct action across space, yet, as is well known, the author 
of this ideally simple and perfect theory held the view that it is 
not possible to conceive of direct mechanical action independent 
of means of transmission. In this belief he differed from his 
pupil, Roger Cotes, and from most of the great mathematical 
astronomers of the 18th century, who worked out in detail the 
task sketched by the genius of Newton. They were content 
with a knowledge of the truth of the principle of gravitation; 
instead of essaying to explain it further by the properties of a 



transmitting medium, they in fact modelled the whole of their 
natural philosophy on that principle, and tried to express all 
kinds of material interaction in terms of laws of direct mechanical 
attraction across space. If material systems are constituted of 
discrete atoms, separated from each other by many times the 
diameter of any of them, this simple plan of exhibiting their 
interactions in terms of direct forces between them would 
indeed be exact enough to apply to a wide range of questions, 
provided we could be certain that the laws of the forces depended 
only on the positions and not also on the motions of the atoms. 
The most important example of its successful application has 
been the theory of capillary action elaborated by P. S. Laplace; 
though even here it appeared, in the hands of Young, and in 
complete fulness afterwards in those of C. F. Gauss, that the 
definite results attainable by the hypothesis of mutual atomic 
attractions really reposed on much wider and less special prin- 
ciples — those, namely, connected with the modern doctrine of 
energy. 

Idea of an Aether. — The wider view, according to which the 
hypothesis of direct transmission of physical influences expresses 
only part of the facts, is that all space is filled with physical 
activity, and that while an influence is passing across from a 
body, A, to another body, B, there is some dynamical process in 
action in the intervening region, though it appears to the senses 
to be mere empty space. The problem is whether we can repre- 
sent the facts more simply by supposing the intervening space 
to be occupied by a medium which transmits physical actions, 
after the manner that a continuous material medium, solid or 
liquid, transmits mechanical disturbance. Various analogies of 
this sort are open to us to follow up: for example, the way in 
which a fluid medium transmits pressure from one immersed 
solid to another — or from one vortex ring belonging to the fluid 
to another, which is a much wider and more suggestive case; 
or the way in which an elastic fluid like the atmosphere transmits 
sound; or the way in which an elastic solid transmits waves of 
transverse as well as longitudinal displacement. It is on our 
familiarity with modes of transmission such as these, and with 
the exact analyses of them which the science of mathematical 
physics has been able to make, that our predilection for filling 
space with an aethereal transmitting medium, constituting a 
universal connexion between material bodies, largely depends 
perhaps ultimately it depends most of all, like all our physica 
conceptions, on the intimate knowledge that we can ourselves 
exert mechanical effect on outside bodies only through tin 
agencies of our limbs and sinews. The problem thus arises 
Can we form a consistent notion of such a connecting medium? 
It must be a medium which can be effective for transmitting ali 
the types of physical action known to us; it would be worse 
than no solution to have one medium to transmit gravitation, 
another to transmit electric effects, another to transmit light, 
and so on. Thus the attempt to find out a constitution for the 
aether will involve a synthesis of intimate correlation of the 
various types of physical agencies, which appear so different tt 
us mainly because we perceive them through different senses. 
The evidence for this view, that all these agencies are at bottom 
connected together and parts of the same scheme, was enormously 
strengthened during the latter half of the 19th century by the 
development of a relation of simple quantitative equivalence 
between them; it has been found that we can define quantities 
relating to them, under the names of mechanical energy, electric 
energy, thermal energy, and so on, so that when one of them 
disappears, it is replaced by the others to exactly equal amount. 
This single principle of energy has transformed physical science 
by making possible the construction of a network of ramifying 
connexions between its various departments; it thus stimulates 
the belief that these constitute a single whole, and encourages 
the search for the complete scheme of interconnexion of which 
the principle of energy and the links which it suggests form 
only a single feature. 

In carrying out this scientific procedure false steps will from 
time to time be made, which will have to be retraced, or rather 
amended; but the combination of experimental science with 



294 



AETHER 



theory has elevated our presumption of the rationality of all 
natural processes, so far as we can apprehend them at all, into 
practical certainty; so that, though the mode of presentation of 
the results may vary from age to age, it is hardly conceivable 
that the essentials of the method are not of permanent validity. 

Atomic Structure of Matter. — The greatest obstacle to such a 
search for the fundamental medium is the illimitable complexity 
of matter, as contrasted with the theoretical simplicity and uni- 
formity of the physical agencies which connect together its 
different parts. It has been maintained since the times of the 
early Greek philosophers, and possibly even more remote ages, 
that matter is constituted of independent indestructible units, 
which cannot ever become divided by means of any mutual 
actions they can exert. Since the period, a century ago, when 
Dalton and his contemporaries constructed from this idea a 
scientific basis for chemistry, the progress of that subject has 
been wonderful beyond any conception that could previously 
have been entertained; and the atomic theory in some form 
appears to be an indispensable part of the framework of physical 
science. Now this doctrine of material atoms is an almost 
necessary corollary to the doctrine of a universal aether. For if 
we held that matter is continuous, one of two alternatives would 
be open. We might consider that matter and aether can co- 
exist in the same space; this would involve the co-existence 
and interaction pi a double set of properties, introducing great 
complication, which would place any coherent scheme of physical 
action probably beyond the powers of human analysis. Or we 
might consider that aether exists only where matter is not, 
thus making it a very rare and subtle and elastic kind of matter; 
then we should have to assign these very properties to the matter 
itself where it replaces aether, in addition to its more familiar 
properties, and the complication would remain. The other 
course is to consider matter as formed of ultimate atoms, each 
the nucleus or core of an intrinsic modification impressed on 
the surrounding region of the aether; this might conceivably 
be of the nature of vortical motion of a liquid round a ring-core, 
thus giving a vortex atom, or of an intrinsic strain of some sort 
radiating from a core, which would give an electric atom. We 
recognize an atom only through its physical activities, as mani- 
fested in its interactions with other atoms at a distance from it; 
this field of physical activity would be identical with the sur- 
rounding field of aethereal motion or strain that is inseparably 
associated with the nucleus, and is carried on along with it as it 
moves. Here then we have the basis of a view in which there are 
not two media to be considered, but one medium, homogeneous 
in essence and differentiated as regards its parts only by the 
presence of nuclei of intrinsic strain or motion — in which the 
physical activities of matter are identified with those arising 
from the atmospheres of modified aether which thus belong to 
its atoms. As regards laws of general physical interactions, the 
atom is fully represented by the constitution of this atmosphere, 
and its nucleus may be left out of our discussions; but in the 
problems of biology great tracts of invariable correlations have 
to be dealt with, which seem hopelessly more complex than any 
known or humanly possible physical scheme. To make room for 
these we have to remember that the atomic nucleus has remained 
entirely undefined and beyond our problem; so that what may 
occur, say when two molecules come into close relations, is outside 
physical science — not, however, altogether outside, for we know 
that when the vital nexus in any portion of matter is dissolved, the 
atoms will remain, in their number, and their atmospheres, and 
all inorganic relations, as they were before vitality supervened. 

Nature of Properties of Material Bodies. — It thus appears 
that the doctrine of atomic material constitution and the doctrine 
of a universal aether stand to each other in a relation of mutual 
support; if the scheme of physical laws is to be as precise as 
observation and measurement appear to make it, both doctrines 
are required in our efforts towards synthesis. Our direct know- 
ledge of matter can, however, never be more than a rough 
knowledge of the general average behaviour of its molecules; 
for the smallest material speck that is sensible to our coarse 
perceptions contains myriads of atoms. The properties of the 



most minute portion of matter which we can examine are thus 
of the nature of averages. We may gradually invent means of 
tracing more and more closely the average drifts of translation 
or orientation, or of changes of arrangement, of the atoms ; but 
there will always remain an unaveraged residue devoid of any 
recognized regularity, which we can only estimate by its total 
amount. Thus, if we are treating of energy, we can separate out 
mechanical and electric and other constituents in it; and there 
will be a residue of which we know nothing except its quantity, 
and which we call thermal. This merely thermal energy — 
which is gradually but very slowly being restricted in amount as 
new subsidiary organized types become recognized in it- — though 
transmutable in equivalent quantities with the other kinds, yet 
is so only to a limited extent; the tracing out of the laws of this 
limitation belongs to the science of thermodynamics. It is the 
business of that science to find out what is the greatest amount 
of thermal energy that can possibly be recoverable into organized 
kinds under given circumstances. The discovery of definite laws 
in this region might at first sight seem hopeless; but the argu- 
ment rests on an implied postulate of stability and continuity of 
constitution of material substances, so that after a cycle of 
transformations we expect to recover them again as they were 
originally — on the postulate, in fact, that we do not expect them 
to melt out of organized existence in our hands. The laws of 
thermodynamics, including the fundamental principle that a 
physical property, called temperature, can be defined, which 
tends towards uniformity, are thus relations between the 
properties of types of material bodies that can exist permanently 
in presence of each other; why they so maintain themselves 
remains unknown, but the fact gives the point d'appui. The 
fundamental character of energy in material systems here 
comes into view; if there were any other independent scalar 
entity, besides mass and energy, that pervaded them with 
relations of equivalence, we should expect the existence of yet 
another set of qualities analogous to those connected with 
temperature. (See Energetics.) . 

Returning now to the aether, on our present point of view 
no such complications there arise; it must be regarded as a 
continuous uniform medium free from any complexities of 
atomic aggregation, whose function is confined to the transmis- 
sion of the various types of physical effect between the portions 
of matter. The problem of its constitution is thus one which 
can be attacked and continually approximated to, and which 
may possibly be definitely resolved. It has to be competent to 
transmit the transverse waves of light and electricity, and the 
other known radiant and electric actions; the way in which 
this is done is now in the main known, though there are still 
questions as to the mode of expression and formulation of our 
knowledge, and also as regards points of detail. This great 
advance, which is the result of the gradual focussing of a century's 
work in the minute exploration of the exact laws of optical and 
electric phenomena, clearly carries with it deeper insight into 
the physical nature of matter itself and its modes of inanimate 
interaction. 

If we rest on the synthesis here described, the energy of. the 
matter, even the thermal part, appears largely as potential 
energy of strain in the aether which interacts with the kinetic 
energy associated with disturbances involving finite velocity 
of matter. It may, however, be maintained that an ultimate 
analysis would go deeper, and resolve all phenomena of elastic 
resilience into consequences of the kinetic stability of steady 
motional states, so that only motions, but not strains, would 
remain. On such a view the aether might conceivably be a 
perfect fluid, its fundamental property of elastic reaction arising 
(as at one time suggested by Kelvin and G. F. FitzGerald) from 
a structure of tangled or interlaced vortex filaments pervading 
its substance, which might conceivably arrange themselves into 
a stable configuration and so resist deformation. This raises 
the further question as to whether the transmission of gravitation 
can be definitely recognized among the properties of an ultimate 
medium; if so, we know that it must be associated with some 
feature, perhaps very deep-seated, or on the other hand perhaps 



AETHER 



295 



depending simply on incompressibility, which is not sensibly 
implicated in the electric and optical activities. With reference 
to all such further refinements of theory, it is to be borne in 
mind that the perfect fluid of hydrodynamic analysis is not a 
merely passive inert plenum; it is also a continuum with the 
property that no finite internal slip or discontinuity of motion 
can ever arise in it through any kind of disturbance; and this 
property must be postulated, as it cannot be explained. 

Motion of Material Atoms through the Aether. — An important 
question arises whether, when a material body is moved through 
the aether, the nucleus of each atom carries some of the surround- 
ing aether along with it; or whether it practically only carries 
on its strain-form or physical atmosphere, which is transferred 
from one portion of aether to another after the manner of a 
shadow, or rather like a loose knot which can slip along a rope 
without the rope being required to go with it. We can obtain 
a pertinent illustration from the motion of a vortex ring in a fluid ; 
if the circular core of the ring is thin compared with its diameter, 
and the vorticity is not very great, it is the vortical state of 
motion that travels across the fluid without transporting the 
latter bodily with it except to a slight extent very close to the 
core. We might thus examine a structure formed of an aggrega- 
tion of very thin vortex rings, which would move across the fluid 
without sensibly disturbing it; on the other hand, if formed of 
stronger vortices, it may transport the portion of the fluid that 
is within, or adjacent to, its own structure along with it as if it 
were a solid mass, and therefore also push aside the surrounding 
fluid as it passes. The motion of the well-known steady spherical 
vortex is an example of the latter case. 

Convection of Optical Waves. — The nature of the motion, if any, 
that is produced in the surrounding regions of the aether by the 
translation of matter through it can be investigated by optical 
experiment. The obvious body to take in the first instance is 
the earth itself, which on account of its annual orbital motion is 
travelling through space at the rate of about 18 miles per second. 
If the surrounding aether is thereby disturbed, the waves of 
light arriving from the stars will partake of its movement; the 
ascertained phenomena of the astronomical aberration of light 
show that the rays travel to the observer, across this disturbed 
aether near the earth, in straight fines. Again, we may split a 
narrow beam of light by partial reflexion from a transparent 
plate, and recombine the constituent beams after they have 
traversed different circuits of nearly equivalent lengths, so as 
to obtain interference fringes. The position of these fringes will 
depend on the total retardation in time of the one beam with 
respect to the other; and thus it might be expected to vary 
with the direction of the earth's motion relative to the apparatus. 
But it is found not to vary at all, even up to the second order 
of the ratio of the earth's velocity to that of light. It has in 
fact been found, with the very great precision of which optical 
experiment is capable, that all terrestrial optical phenomena — 
reflexion, refraction, polarization linear and circular, diffraction 
— are entirely unaffected by the direction of the earth's motion, 
while the same result has recently been extended to electrostatic 
forces ; and this is our main experimental clue. 

We pass on now to the theory. We shall make the natural 
supposition that motion of the aether, say with velocity (u,v,w) 
at the point {x,y,z) , is simply superposed on the velocity V of 
the optical undulations through that medium, the latter not 
being intrinsically altered. Now the direction and phase of the 
light are those of the ray which reaches the eye; and by Fermat's 
principle, established by Huygens for undulatory motion, the 
path of a ray is that track along which the disturbance travels 
in least time, in the restricted sense that any alteration of any 
short reach of the path will increase the time. Thus the path of 
the ray when the aether is at rest is the curve which makes 
fdsjX least; but when it is in motion it is the curve which makes 
fdsl(\ 7 +lu+mv+nw) least, where (l,m,n) is the direction vector 
of 5s. The latter integral becomes, on expanding in a series, 

JdsfV -J\udx +vdy+wdz)FV* +f(udx +vdy+wdz) 2 !VHs + ..., 

since Ids = dx. If the path is to be unaltered by the motion of 



the aether, as the law of astronomical aberration suggests, this 
must differ from fds[Y by terms not depending on the path — 
that is, by terms involving only the beginning and end of it. In 
the case of the free aether V is constant; thus, if we neglect 
squares like (w/V) 2 , the condition is that udx -\-vdy-\-wdz be the 
exact differential of some function <f>. If this relation is true 
along all paths, the velocity of the aether must be of irrotational 
type, like that of frictionless fluid. Moreover, this is precisely 
the condition for the absence of interference between the com- 
ponent of a split beam; because, the time of passage being to 
the first order 

fds/V —/{udx -\-vdy -\-wdz)V 2 , 

the second term will then be independent of the path (<j> being a 
single valued function) and therefore the same for the paths' of 
both the interfering beams. If therefore the aether can be put 
into motion, we conclude (with Stokes) that such motion, in free 
space, must be of strictly irrotational type. 

But our experimental data are not confined to free space. If 
c is the velocity of radiation in free space and /* the refractive 
index of a transparent body, V=c/ / u; thus it is the expres- 
sion c^fi^iu'dx+v'dy+w'dz) that is to be integrable explicitly, 
where now (u',v',ip') is what is added to V owing to the velocity 
(u,v,w) of the medium. As, however, our terrestrial optical appa- 
ratus is now all-in motion along with the matter, we must 
deal with the rays relative to the moving system, and to these 
also Fermat's principle clearly applies; thus V+ (lu'+mv'+nw') 
is here the velocity of radiation in the direction of the ray, but 
relative to the moving material system. Now the expression 
above given cannot be integrable exactly, under all circumstances 
and whatever be the axes of co-ordinates, unless (/j, 2 u',(j?v 1 ,frw') 
is the gradient of a continuous function. In the simplest case, 
that of uniform translation, these components of the gradient 
will each be constant throughout the region; at a distant place 
in free aether where there is no motion, they must thus be equal 
to -u,-v,- J w, as they refer to axes moving with the matter. 
Hence the paths and times of passage of all rays relative to the 
material system will not be altered by a uniform motion of the 
system, provided the velocity of radiation relative to the system, 
in material of index /x, is diminished by /z _z times the velocity of 
the system in the direction of the radiation, that is, provided the 
absolute velocity of radiation is increased by i-/i" 2 times the 
velocity of the material system; this involves that the free 
aether for which ix is unity shall remain at rest. This statement 
constitutes the famous hypothesis of Fresnel, which thus ensures 
that all phenomena of ray-path and refraction, and all those 
depending on phase, shall be unaffected by uniform convection 
of the material medium, in accordance with the results of 
experiment. 

7s the Aether Stationary or Mobile? — This theory secures that 
the times of passage of the rays shall be independent of the 
motion of the system, only up to the first order of the ratio of 
its velocity to that of radiation. But a classical experiment of 
A. A. Michelson, in which the ray-path was wholly in air, showed 
that the independence extends to higher orders. This result is 
inconsistent with the aether remaining at rest, unless we assume 
that the dimensions of the moving system depend, though to an 
extent so small as to be not otherwise detectable, on its orienta- 
tion with regard to the aether that is streaming through it. It is, 
however, in complete accordance with a view that would make 
the aether near the earth fully partake in its orbital motion — a 
view which the null effect of convection on all terrestrial optical 
and electrical phenomena also strongly suggests. But the aether 
at a great distance must in any case be at rest ; while the facts of 
astronomical aberration require that the motion of that medium 
must be irrotational. These conditions cannot be consistent 
with sensible convection of the aether near the earth without 
involving discontinuity in its motion at some intermediate 
distance, so that we are thrown back on the previous theory. 

Another powerful reason for taking the aether to be stationary 
is afforded by the character of the equations of electrodynamics; 
they are all of linear type, and superposition of effects is possible. 
Now the kinetics of a medium in which the parts can have finite 



296 



AETHER 



relative motions will lead to equations which are not linear — as, 
for example, those of hydrodynamics— and the phenomena will 
be far more complexly involved. It is true that the theory of 
vortex rings in hydrodynamics is of a simpler type; but electric 
currents cannot be likened to permanent vortex rings, because 
their circuits can be broken and the element of cyclic steadiness 
on which the simplicity depends is thereby destroyed. 

Dynamical Theories of the Aether. — The analytical equations 
which represent the propagation of light in free aether, and also 
in aether modified by the presence of matter, were originally 
developed on the analogy of the equations of propagation of 
elastic effects in solid media. Various types of elastic solid 
medium have thus been invented to represent the aether, without 
complete success in any case. In T. MacCullagh's hands the 
correct equations were derived from a single energy formula by 
the principle of least action; and while the validity of this 
dynamical method was maintained, it was frankly admitted 
that no mechanical analogy was forthcoming. When Clerk 
Maxwell pointed out the way to the common origin of optical 
and electrical phenomena, these equations naturally came to 
repose on an electric basis, the connexion having been first 
definitely exhibited by FitzGerald in 1878; and according as 
the independent variable was one or other of the vectors which 
represent electric force, magnetic force or electric polarity, they 
took the form appropriate to one or other of the elastic theories 
above mentioned. 

In this place it must suffice to indicate the gist of the more 
recent developments of the electro-optical theory, which in- 
volve the dynamical verification of Fresnel's hypothesis regard- 
ing optical convection and the other relations above described. 
The aether is taken to be at rest; and the strain-forms belong- 
ing to the atoms are the electric fields of the intrinsic charges, 
or electrones, involved in their constitution. When the atoms 
are in motion these strain-forms produce straining and unstrain- 
ing in the aether as they pass across it, which in its motional or 
kinetic aspect constitutes the resulting magnetic field; as the 
strains are slight the coefficient of ultimate inertia here involved 
must be great. True electric current arises solely from con- 
vection of the atomic charges or electrons; this current is there- 
fore not restricted as to form in any way. But when the rate of 
change of aethereal strain — that is, of (f,g,h) specified as Max- 
well's electric displacement in free aether — is added to it, an 
analytically convenient vector (u,v ,w) is obtained which possesses 
the characteristic property of being circuital like the flow of 
an incompressible fluid, and has therefore been made funda- 
mental in the theory by Maxwell under the name of the total 
electric current. 

As already mentioned, all efforts to assimilate optical pro- 
pagation to transmission of waves in an ordinary solid medium 
have failed; and though the idea of regions of intrinsic strain, 
as for example in unannealed glass, is familiar in physics, yet 
on account of the absence of mobility of the strain no attempt 
had been made to employ them to illustrate the electric fields 
of atomic charges. The idea of MacCullagh's aether, and its 
property of purely rotational elasticity which had been ex- 
pounded objectively by W. J. M. Rankine, was therefore much 
vivified by Lord Kelvin's specification (Comptes Renins, 1889) 
of a material gyrostatically constituted medium which would 
possess this character. More recently a way has been pointed 
out in which a mobile permanent field of electric force could 
exist in such a medium so as to travel freely in company with 
its nucleus or intrinsic charge — the nature of the mobility of the 
latter, as well as its intimate constitution, remaining unknown. 

A dielectric substance is electrically polarized by a field of 
electric force, the atomic poles being made up of the displaced 
positive and negative intrinsic charges in the atom : the polariza- 
tion per unit volume (f',g',h') may be defined on the analogy of 
magnetism, and d/dt(f',g',h') thus constitutes true electric current 
of polarization, i.e. of electric separation in the molecules, 
specified per unit volume. The convection of a medium thus 
polarized involves electric disturbance, and therefore must con- 
tribute to the true electric current; the determination of this 



constituent of the current is the most delicate point in the in- 
vestigation. The usual definition of the component current in 
any direction, as the net amount of electrons which crosses, 
towards the positive side, an element of surface fixed in space 
at right angles to that direction, per umt area per unit time, 
here gives no definite result. The establishment and convection 
of a single polar atom constitutes in fact a #w<wi-magnetization, 
in addition to the polarization current as above defined, the 
negative poles completing the current circuits of the positive 
ones. But in the transition from molecular theory to the electro- 
dynamics of extended media, all magnetism has to be replaced 
by a distribution of current; the latter being now specified by 
volume as well as by flow so that (u,v,w) St is the current in the 
element of volume 5r. In the present case the total dielectric 
contribution to this current works out to be the change per unit 
time in the electric separation in the molecules of the element 
of volume, as it moves uniformly with the matter, all other 
effects being compensated molecularly without affecting the 
propagation. 1 On subtracting from this total the current of 
establishment of polarization d/dt/(f',g',h') as formulated above, 
there remains vd/dx(f ' ,g' ,h') as the current of convection of 
polarization when the convection is taken for simplicity to be 
in the direction of the axis of x with velocity v. The polariza- 
tion itself is determined from the electric force (P,Q,R) by the 
usual statical formula of linear type which becomes lor an iso- 
tropic medium 

because any change of the dielectric constant K arising from the 
convection of the material through the aether must be inde- 
pendent of the sign of v and therefore be of the second order. 
Now the electric force (P,Q,R) is the force acting on the electrons 
of the medium moving with velocity v; consequently by Fara- 
day's electrodynamic law 

(P,Q,R)-(P',Q'-uc,R'+i*). 
where (P',Q',R') is the force that would act on electrons at 
rest, and (a,b,c) is the magnetic induction. The latter force is, 
by Maxwell's hypothesis or by the dynamical theory of an aether 
pervaded by electrons, the same as that which strair s the aether, 
and may be called the aethereal force; it thereby produces an 
aethereal electric displacement, say (f,g,h), according to the 
relation (f,g,h) = ( 4 xc 2 ) -KP'.Q'.R 1 ). 

in which C is a constant belonging to the aether, which turns 
out to be the velocity of light. The current of aethereal dis- 
placement d/dt(f,g,h) is what adds on to the true electric current 
to produce the total circuital current of Maxwell. 

We have now to substitute these data in the universally valid 
circuital relations — -namely, (i) line integral of magnetic force 
round a circuit is equal to 4X times the current through its 
aperture, which may be regarded as a definition of the constitu- 
tion of the aether and its relation to the electrons involved in 
it; and (ii) line integral of the electric force belonging to any 
material circuit (i.e. acting on the electrons situated on it which 
move with the velocity of the matter) is equal to minus the 
time-rate of change of the magnetic induction through that 
circuit as it moves with the matter, this being a dynamical 
consequence of the aethereal constitution assigned in (i). 

We may now, as is somewhat the more natural course in the 
terrestrial application, take axes (x,y,z) which move with the 
matter; but the current must be invariably defined by the flux 
across surfaces fixed in space, so that we may say that relation 
(i) refers to a circuit fixed in space, while (ii) refers to one moving 
with the matter. These circuital relations, when expressed 
analytically, are then for a dielectric medium of types 
dy dp 
Ty -«2F = 4™ 

(«.».») = (a+«^) (/.«'■*')+»(/**). 

dR_dQ = _da 

dy dz dt 



where 
and 



1 See H. A. Lorentz, loc. oil. infra; J. Larmor, Aether and Matter, 
p. 262 and passim. 



AETHICUS ISTER 



297 



where, when magnetic quality is inoperative, the magnetic 
induction (a,b,c) is identical with the magnetic force (a,/3,7). 

These equations determine all the phenomena. They take 
this simple form, however, only when the movement of the 
matter is one of translation. If v varies with respect to locality, 
or if there is a velocity of convection (p,q,r) variable with respect 
to direction and position, and analytical expression of the re- 
lation (ii) assumes a more complex form; we thus derive the 
most general equations of electrodynamic propagation for 
matter treated as continuous, anyhow distributed and moving 
in any manner. 

For the simplest case of polarized waves travelling parallel 
to the axis of x, with the magnetic oscillation 7 along z and 
the electric oscillation Q along y, all the quantities are functions 
of x and / alone; the total current is along y and given with 
respect to our moving axes by 

\dt W 4xc 2 ^dtKirc 1 )™ 
also the circuital relations here reduce to 



dy 
~d~x 



-4«, ^= - 



dx~ 



dy 

~dt '' 



thus 



dx* 



. dv 

=4x Hi 



giving, on substitution for v, 

(c^)^ = K^-2u^. 

For a simple wave-train, Q varies as sin m(x-Vt), leading on 
substitution to the velocity of propagation V relative to the 
moving material, by means of the equation KV 2 + 2uV = c 2 — v 2 ; 
this gives, to the first order of v/c, V = c/K 5 — u/K, which is in 
accordance with Fresnel's law. Trains of waves nearly but not 
quite homogeneous as regards wave-length will as usual be 
propagated as wave-groups travelling with the slightly different 
velocity d(VK~ 1 )/d\~ i , the value of K occurring in V being a 
function of X determined by the law of optical dispersion of the 
medium. 

For purposes of theoretical discussions relating to moving 
radiators and reflectors, it is important to remember that the 
dynamics of all this theory of electrons involves the neglect of 
terms of the order (v/c) 2 , not merely in the value of K but 
throughout. 

Recent Experimental Developments. — The modification of the 
spectrum of a radiating gas by a magnetic field, such as would 
result from the hypothesis that the radiators are the system of 
revolving or oscillating electrons in the molecule, was detected 
by P. Zeeman in 1896, and worked up, in conjunction with H. A. 
Lorentz, on the general lines suggested by the electron-theory 
of molecular constitution. While it cannot be said that the full 
significance of this very definite phenomenon, consisting of the 
splitting of the spectral line into a number of polarized com- 
ponents, has yet been made out, a wide field of correlation with 
optical theory, especially in the neighbourhood of absorption 
bands, has been developed by Zeeman himself, by A. H. Bec- 
querel, by D. Macaluso and O. M. Corbino, and by other workers. 

The most fundamental experimental confirmation that the 
theory of the aether has received on the optical side- in recent 
years has been the verification of Maxwell's proposition that 
radiation exerts mechanical force on a material system, on which 
it falls, which may be represented in all cases as the resultant 
of pressures operating along the rays, and of intensity equal at 
each point of free space to the density of radiant energy. A 
high vacuum is needed for the detection of the minute forces 
here concerned; but just in that case the indirect radiometer- 
effect of the heating of the residual gas masks the effect. P. N. 
Lebedew in 1900 succeeded, by operating on metallic vanes so 
thin that the exposed and averted faces were practically at the 
same temperature, in satisfactorily verifying the relation for 
metals; and very soon after, E. F. Nichols and G. F. Hull 
published accounts of an exact and extensive research, in which 
the principle had been fully and precisely confirmed as regards 



both transparent and opaque bodies. The experiment of J. H. 
Poynting may also be mentioned, in which the tangential com- 
ponent of the thrust of obliquely incident radiation is separately 
put in evidence, by the torsion produced in an arrangement 
which is not sensitive to the normal component or to the radio- 
meter-pressure of the residual gas. (See Radiometer.) 

Next to these researches on the pressure of radiation, which, 
by forming the mechanical link between radiation and matter, 
are fundamental for the thermodynamics of radiant energy, the 
most striking recent result has been the discovery of H. Rubens 
and E. Hagen that for dark heat rays of only about ten times the 
wave-length of luminous radiation, the properties of metals are 
determined by their electric resistance alone, which then masks 
all resonance due to periods of free vibration of the molecules; 
and, moreover, that the resistance for such alternations is practi- 
cally the same as the ohmic resistance for ordinary steady cur- 
rents. They found that the absorbing powers of the metals, and 
therefore, by the principle of exchanges, their radiating powers 
also, are proportional to the square roots of their electric con- 
ductivities. Maxwell had himself, at an early stage of his theory, 
tested the absorbing power of gold-leaf for light, and found that 
the effective conductivity for luminous vibrations must be very 
much greater than its steady ohmic value; it is, in fact, there a 
case of incipient conductivity, which is continually being undone 
on account of the rapid alternation of force before it is fully 
established. That, however, complete conduction should arrive 
with alternations only ten times slower than light was an un- 
expected and remarkable fact, which verifies the presumption 
that the process of conduction is one in which the dynamic 
activities of the molecules do not come into play. The corollary, 
that the electric resistance of a metal can be determined in 
absolute units by experiments on the reflexion of heat-rays 
from its surface, is a striking illustration of the unification of 
the various branches of physical science, which has come in the 
train of the development of the theory of the aether. (See 
Radiation.) 

Finally, reference should be made to the phenomena of radio- 
activity, whether excited by the electric discharge in vacuum 
tubes, foreshadowed in part by Sir Wm. Crookes and G. G. 
Stokes, and later by A. Schuster and others, but first fully 
developed with astonishing results including the experimental 
discovery of the free electron by J. J. Thomson, or the correlated 
phenomena occurring spontaneously in radio-active bodies as 
discovered by H. Becquerel and by M. and Mme Curie, and 
investigated by them and by E. Rutherford and others. These 
results constitute a far-reaching development of the modern or 
electrodynamic theory of the aether, of which the issue can 
hardly yet be foreseen. • 

References. — Maxwell, Collected Papers-, H. A. Lorentz, Archives 
Neerlandaises, xxi. 1887, and xxv. 1892, and a tract, Versuch einer 
Theorie der electrischen und optischen Erscheinungen in bewegten 
Korpern (Leyden, 1895); also recent articles " Elektrodynamik " 
and " Elektronentheorie " in the Encyk. der Math. Wissenschaften, 
Band v. 13, 14; O. Lodge, " On Aberration Problems," Phil. Trans. 
1893 and 1897; J. Larmor, Phil. Trans. 1894-95-97, and a treatise, 
Aether and Matter (1900), where full references are given. Of recent 
years most treatises on physical optics, e.g. those of P. K. L. Drude, 
A. Schuster, R. W. Wood, have been written largely on the basis of 
the general physics of the aether; while the Collected Papers of 
LordRayleigh should be accessible to all who desire a first-hand know- 
ledge of the development of the optical side of the subject. See 
also Molecule, Electricity, Light and Radiation, (j. L.*) 

AETHICUS ( = Ethictjs) ISTER, "the philosopher of Istria," 
the supposed but unknown author of a description of the world 
written in Greek. An abridgment, under the title of Cosmo- 
graphia Ethici, written in barbarous Latin, and wrongly described 
as the work of St Jerome, probably belongs to the 7th century. 
After a discussion of the creation of the world and a description 
of the earth, an account of the wonderful journeys of Aethicus 
is given, with digressions on various subjects, such as Alexander 
the Great and the kings of Rome, full of obscure and fabulous 
details. 

The name Aethicus is also attached to another geographical 
treatise probably dating from the 6th century, a reproduction, 



2 9 8 



AETIOLOGY— AETOLIA 



with some unimportant additions, of the cosmography— little 
else than a dry list of names — of Julius Honorius. 

Editions. — D'Avezac (1852); Pertz (1853); Wuttke (1854); 
Riese's Geographi Latini Minores (1878) ; see also Bunbury, History 
of A ncient Geography. 

AETIOLOGY, or Etiology (from Gr. airia, cause, and 
\oyia, discourse) , strictly, the science or philosophy of causation, 
but generally used to denote the part of any special science (and 
especially of that of medicine and disease) which investigates the 
causes and origin of its phenomena. An aetiological myth is 
one which is regarded as having been invented ex post facto to 
explain some fact, name or coincidence, the true account or 
origin of which has been forgotten. Such myths were often 
based on grotesque philological analogies, according to which 
an existing connexion between two personalities (cities, &c.) 
was traced back to a common mythical origin. For a good 
example of the evolution of such myths, see the argument under 
Aegina, History. 

AETION, or Eetion, a Greek painter, mentioned by Cicero, 
Pliny and Lucian. His most noted work, described in detail 
by Lucian {Herodotus or Eetion, 5), was a picture representing 
the marriage of Alexander and Roxana. He is said to have 
exhibited it at the Olympic games, and by it so to have won 
the favour of the president that he gave him his daughter in 
marriage. Through a misunderstanding of the words of Lucian, 
Aetion has been supposed to belong to the age of the Antonines; 
but there can be little doubt that he was a contemporary of 
Alexander and of Apelles (Brunn, Geschichte der griechischen 
Kiinstler, ii. p. 243). Pliny gives his date as 350 B.C. 

AETIUS (fl. 350), surnamed " the Atheist," founder of an 
extreme sect of Arians, was a native of Coele-Syria. After 
working as a vine-dresser and then as a goldsmith he became a 
travelling doctor, and displayed great skill in disputations on 
medical subjects; but his controversial power soon found a 
wider field for its exercise in the great theological question of 
the time. He studied successively under the Arians, Paulinus, 
bishop of Antioch, Athanasius, bishop of Anazarbus, and the 
presbyter Antonius of Tarsus. In 3 50 he was ordained a deacon 
by Leontius of Antioch, but was shortly afterwards forced by 
the orthodox party to leave that town. At the first synod of 
Sirmium he won a dialectic victory over the homoiousian bishops, 
Basilius and Eustathius, who sought in consequence to stir up 
against him the enmity of Caesar Gallus. In 356 he went to 
Alexandria with Eunomius (q.v.) in order to advocate Arianism, 
but he was banished by Constantius. Julian recalled him from 
exile, bestowed upon him an estate in Lesbos, and retained him 
for a time at his court in Constantinople. Being consecrated 
a bishop, he used his office in the interests of Arianism by creating 
other bishops of that party. At the accession of Valens (364) 
he retired to his estate at Lesbos, but soon returned to Constanti- 
nople, where he died in 367. The Anomoean sect of the Arians, 
of whom he was the leader, are sometimes Called after him 
Aetians. His work De Fide has been preserved in connexion 
with a refutation written by Epiphanius (Haer. Ixxvi. 10). Its 
main thought is that the Homousia, i.e. the doctrine that the 
Son (therefore the Begotten) is essentially God, is self-con- 
tradictory, since the idea of unbegottenness is just that which 
constitutes the nature of God. 

See A. Harnack, History of Dogma, vol. iv. passim. 

AETIUS, a Greek physician, born at Amida in Mesopotamia, 
flourished at the beginning of the 6th century a.d. He studied 
at Alexandria, and became court physician at Byzantium and 
comes obsequii, one of the chief officers of the imperial household. 
He wrote a large medical work in sixteen books, founded on 
Oribasius and compiled from various sources, especially Galen 
[Galenos]. Superstition and mysticism play a great part in 
his remedies. Eight books of the Greek original were printed 
at Venice, 1 534, and a complete Latin translation by Cornarius 
appeared at Basel, 1542. 

See Weigel, Aetianarum exercitationum specimen (1791) ; Danelius, 
Beitrag zur Augenheilkunde des Aetius (1889); Zernos, Aetii sermo 
sextidecimus et ultimus, editio princeps (1901). 



AETIUS (d. 454), a Roman general of the closing period of the 
Western empire, born at Dorostolus in Moesia, late in the 4th 
century. He was the son of Gaudentius, who, although possibly 
of barbarian family, rose in the service of the Western empire to 
be master of the horse, and later count of Africa. Aetius passed 
some years as hostage, first with Alaric and the Goths, and later 
in the camp of Rhuas, king of the Huns, acquiring in this way the 
knowledge which enabled him afterwards to defeat them. In 424 
he led into Italy an army of 60,000 barbarians, mostly Huns, 
which he employed first to support the primicerius Joannes, who 
had proclaimed himself emperor, and, on the defeat of the latter, 
to enforce his claim to the supreme command of the army in Gaul 
upon Placidia, the empress-mother and regent for Valentinian III. 
His calumnies against his rival, Count Boniface, which were at 
first believed by the emperor, led Boniface to revolt and call the 
Vandals to Africa. Upon the discovery of the truth, Boniface, 
although defeated in Africa, was received into favour by Valen- 
tinian; but Aetius came down against Boniface from his Gallic 
wars, like another Julius Caesar, and in the battle which followed 
wounded Boniface fatally with his own javelin. From 433 to 450 
Aetius was the dominating personality in the Western empire. 
In Gaul he won his military reputation, upholding for nearly 
twenty years, by combined policy and daring, the falling fortunes 
of the empire. . His greatest victory was that of Chalons-sur- 
Marne (September 20, 451), in which he led the Gallic forces 
against Attila and the Huns. This was the last triumph of the 
empire. Three years later (454) Aetius presented himself at 
court to claim the emperor's daughter in marriage for his son 
Gaudentius; but Valentinian, suspecting him of designs upon the 
crown, slew him with his own hand. 

See T. Hodgkin, Italy and her Invaders, vols. i. and ii. (1880). 

AETOLIA, a district of northern Greece, bounded on the S. 
by the Corinthian Gulf, on the W. by the river Achelous, on the 
N. and E. by the western spurs of Parnassus and Oeta. The 
land naturally falls into two divisions. The basins of the lower 
Achelous (mod. Aspropotamo) and Euenus (Phidharis) form a 
series of alluvial valleys intersected by detached ridges which 
mostly run parallel to the coast. This district of " Old Aetolia " 
lacks a suitable sea-board, but the inland, and especially the plain 
of central Aetolia lying to the north of Lakes Hyria and Trichonis 
and Mount Aracynthus, forms a rich agricultural country. The 
northern and eastern regions are broken by an extensive complex 
of chains and peaks, whose rugged limestone flanks are clad at 
most with stunted shrubs and barely leave room for a few pre- 
carious mule-tracks. These heights often rise in the frontier- 
ranges of Tymphrestus, Oxia and Corax to more than 7000 ft.; 
the snow-capped pinnacle of Kiona attains to 8240 ft. A few 
defiles pass through this barrier to the other side of the north 
Greek watershed. 

In early legend Old Aetolia, with its cities of Pleuron and 
Calydon, figures prominently. During the great migrations (see 
Dorians) the population was largely displaced, and the old 
inhabitants long remained in a backward condition. In the 5th 
century some tribes were still living in open villages under petty 
kings, addicted to plunder and piracy, and hardly recognized 
as Hellenes at all. Yet their military strength was not to be 
despised: in 426 their archers and slingers easily repelled an 
Athenian invasion under Demosthenes. In the 4th century the 
Aetolians began to take a greater part in Greek politics, and, in 
return for helping Epaminondas (367) and Philip of Macedon (338), 
recovered control of their sea-board, to which they annexed the 
Acarnanian coast and the Oeniadae. Aetolia's prosperity dates 
from the period of Macedonian supremacy. It may be ascribed 
partly to the wealth and influence acquired by Aetolian mer- 
cenaries in Hellenistic courts, but chiefly to the formation of a 
national Aetolian league, the first effective institution of this 
kind in Greece. Created originally to meet the peril of an in- 
vasion by the Macedonian regents Antipater and Craterus, who 
had undertaken a punitive expedition against Aetolia after the 
Lamian War (322), and by Cassander (314-311), the confederacy 
grew rapidly during the subsequent period of Macedonian weak- 
ness. Since 290 it had extended its power over all the uplands of 



AFARS— AFFECTION 



299 



central Greece, where its command over Heracleia (280) provided 
it with an important defensive position against northern invaders, 
its control of Delphi and the Amphictyonic council with a useful 
political instrument. The valour of the Aetolians was con- 
spicuously displayed in 279, when they broke the strength of the 
Celtic irruption by slaughtering great hordes of marauders. The 
commemorative festival of the Soteria, which the league estab- 
lished at Delphi, obtained recognition from many leading Greek 
states. After annexing Boeotia (by 245) the Aetolians controlled 
all central Greece. Endeavouring next to expand into Pelopon- 
nesus, they allied themselves with Antigonus Gonatas of Mace- 
donia against the Achaean league (q.v.), and besides becoming 
protectors of Elis and Messenia won several Arcadian cities. 
Their naval power extended to Cephalonia, to the Aegaean 
islands and even to the Hellespont. The league at its zenith had 
thus a truly imperial status. 

Later in the century its power began to be sapped by Mace- 
donia. To check King Demetrius (239-229) the Aetolians joined 
arms with the Achaeans. In 224 they held Heracleia Trachis 
against Antigonus Doson, but lost control of Boeotia and Phocis. 
Since 228 their Arcadian possessions had been abandoned to 
Sparta. At the same time a new enemy arose in the Illyrian 
pirate fleets, which outdid them in unscrupulousness and violence. 
The raids of two Aetolian chiefs in Achaean territory (220) led to 
a coalition between Achaea and Philip V. of Macedon, who 
assailed the invaders with great energy, driving them out of 
Peloponnesus and marching into Aetolia itself, where he surprised 
and sacked the federal capital Thermon. After buying peace by 
the cession of Acarnania (217) the league concluded a compact 
with Rome, in which both states agreed to plunder ruthlessly 
their common enemies (211). In the great war of their Roman 
allies against Philip the federal troops took a prominent part, 
their cavalry being largely responsible for the victory of Cynos- 
cephalae (197). The Romans in return restored central Greece 
to the league, but by withholding its former Thessalian posses- 
sions excited its deep resentment. The Aetolians now invited 
Antiochus III. of Syria to European Greece, and so precipitated 
a conflict with Rome. But in the war they threw away their 
chances. In 192 they wasted themselves in an unsuccessful 
attempt to secure Sparta. In 191 they supported Antiochus 
badly, and by their slackness in the defence of Thermopylae 
made his position in Greece untenable. Having thus isolated 
themselves the Aetolians stood at bay behind their walls against 
the Romans, who refused all compromises, and, after the general 
surrender in 189, restricted the league to Aetolia proper and 
assumed control over its foreign relations. In 167 the country 
suffered severely from the intrigues of a philo-Roman party, 
which caused a series of judicial murders and the deportation of 
many patriots to Italy. By the time of Sulla, when the league 
is mentioned for the last time, its functions were purely nominal. 
The federal constitution closely resembled that of the Achaean 
league (q.v.), for which it doubtless served as a model. The 
general assembly, convoked every autumn at Thermon to elect 
officials, and at other places in special emergencies, shaped the 
league's general policy; it was nominally open to all freemen, 
though no doubt the Aetolian chieftains really controlled it. 
The council of deputies from the confederate cities undertook 
the routine of administration and jurisdiction. The strategus 
(general), aided by 30 apocleti (ministers), had complete control 
in the field and presided over the assembly, though with restricted 
advisory powers. The Aetolians also used the Amphictyonic 
synod for passing solemn enactments. The league's relation to 
outlying dependencies is obscure; many of these were probably 
mere protectorates or " allied states " and secured no representa- 
tion. The federal executive Was certainly much more efficient 
than that of the Achaeans, and its councils suffered less from 
disunion; but its generals and admirals, official or otherwise, 
enjoyed undue licence; hence the league deservedly gained an 
evil name for the numerous acts of lawlessness or violence which 
its troops committed. But as a champion of republican Greece 
against foreign enemies no other power of the age rendered equal 
services. After the first overthrow of the Byzantine empire 



Aetolia passed to a branch of the old imperial house (1205). 
In the 15th century it was held by Scanderbeg (q.v.) and by 
the Venetians, but Mahommed II. brought it definitely under 
Turkish rule. In the War of Independence the Aetolians by 
their stubborn defence, culminating in the sieges of Missolonghi 
(q.v.), formed the backbone of the rebellion. Northern Aetolia 
remains a desolate region, inhabited mainly by Vlach shep- 
herds. The south-western plain, though rendered unhealthy, by 
lagoons, and central Aetolia yield good crops of currants, vine, 
maize and tobacco, which are conveyed by railway from Agrinion 
and Anatolikon to the coast. The country, which forms part of 
the modern department of Acarnania and Aetolia, contains 
numerous fragments of ancient fortifications. It has contributed 
a notable proportion of distinguished men to modern Greece. 

Authorities. — Strabo pp. 450 sqq. ; Thucydides iii. 94-98 ; 
Diodorus xviii. 24. 5; Pausanias x. 20 sq.; Polybius and Livy 
passim; W. J. Woodhouse, Aetolia (Oxford, 1897); M. Dubois, 
Les Ligues acheenne et etolienne (Paris, 1885); E. A. Freeman, 
Federal Government (ed. 1893, London), ch. vi.; B. V. Head, Historia 
Numorum (Oxford, 1887), pp. 283-284; M. Holleaux in Bulletin de 
Correspondance Hellenique (1905, pp. 362-372); G. Sotiriades in 
'E<t>r)H<:pis 'Apxa.u>\o-/i.Kri, (19OO) pp. 163-212, (19O3) pp. 73-94, and 
in Bulletin de Correspondance Hellenique (1907), pp. 139-184; 
C. Salvetti in Studi di Storia Antica, vol. ii. (Rome, 1893), PP- 
270-320. (M. O. B. C.) 

AFARS (Danakil), a tribe of African " Arabs " of Hamitic 
stock. They occupy the arid coast-lands between Abyssinia 
and the sea. They claim to be Arabs, but are more akin to the 
Galla and Somali. The tribe is roughly divisible into a pastoral 
and a coast-dwelling group. Their religion is chiefly fetich 
and tree-worship; many, nominally, profess Mahommedanism. 
They are distinguished by narrow straight noses, thin lips and 
small pointed chins; their cheekbones are not prominent. 
They are more scantily clothed than the Abyssinians or Galla, 
wearing, generally, nothing but a waist-cloth. Their women, 
when quite young, are pretty and graceful. Their huts are often 
tastefully decorated, the floors being spread with yellow mats, 
embroidered with red and violet designs. The Afars are divided 
into many sub-tribes, each having an hereditary sultan, whose 
power is, however, limited. They are desperate fighters and in 
1875 successfully resisted an attempt to bring them under 
Egyptian rule. In 1883-1888, however, their most important 
sultan concluded treaties placing his country under Italian 
protection. The Afar region is now partly under Abyssinian 
and partly under Italian authority. The Afars are also found in 
considerable numbers in French Somaliland. They have a 
saying " Guns are only useful to frighten cowards." They were 
formerly redoubtable pirates, but the descendants of these 
corsairs are now fishermen, and are the only sailors in the Red 
Sea who hunt the dugong. 

See Fr. Scazamucci and E. H. Giglioli, Notizie sui Danakil (1884) I 
P. Paulitschke, Ethnographie Nordost-Afrikas (2 vols., Berlin, 1893- 
1896), and Die geographische Erj 'orschung der Addl-Ldnder und Hardrs 
in Ost-Afrika (Leipzig, 1884). 

AFER, DOMITIUS, a Roman orator and advocate, born at 
Nemausus (Nimes) in Gallia Narbonensis, flourished in the 
reigns of Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius and Nero. His pupil 
Quintilian calls him the greatest orator he had ever known; 
but he disgraced his talents by acting as public informer against 
some of the most distinguished personages in Rome. He 
gained the favour of Tiberius by accusing Claudia Pulcra, the 
widow of Germanicus, of adultery and the use of magic arts 
against the emperor. Judicious flattery secured him the consul- 
ship under Caligula (39) ; and under Nero he was superintendent 
of the water supply. He died a.d. 60, according to Jerome, of 
over-eating. Quintilian quotes some of his witty sayings (dicta), 
collections of which were published, and mentions two books by 
him On Witnesses. 

Quintilian, Instit. vi. 3. 42, viii. 5. 16, x. I. 118, &c. ; Tac. Ann. 
iv. 52; Dio Cassius lix. 19, lx. 33; Pliny, Epp. viii. 18. 

AFFECTION (Lat. ad, and facere, to do something to, sc. a 
person), literally, a mental state resulting generally from an 
external influence. It is popularly used of a relation between 
persons amounting to more than goodwill or friendship. By 
ethical writers the word has been used generally of distinct 



3oo 



AFFIDAVIT— AFFILIATION 



states of feeling, both lasting and spasmodic; some contrast it 
with " passion " as being free from the distinctively sensual 
element. More specifically the word has been restricted to 
emotional states which are in relation to persons. In the former 
sense, it is the Gr. irados, and as such it appears in Descartes 
and most of the early British ethical writers. On various 
grounds, however — e.g. that it does not involve anxiety or excite- 
ment, that it is comparatively inert and compatible with the 
entire absence of the sensuous element — it is generally and use- 
fully distinguished from passion. In this narrower sense the 
word has played a great part in ethical systems, which have 
spoken of the social or parental " affections " as in some sense 
a part of moral obligation. For a consideration of these and 
similar problems, which depend ultimately on the degree in 
which the affections are regarded as voluntary, see H. Sidgwick, 
Methods of Ethics, pp. 345-349. 

In psychology the terms " affection " and " affective " are 
of great importance. As all intellectual phenomena have by 
experimentalists been reduced to sensation, so all emotion has 
been and is regarded as reducible to simple mental affection, 
the element of which all emotional manifestations are ultimately 
composed. The nature of this element is a problem which has 
been provisionally, but not conclusively, solved by many 
psychologists; the method is necessarily experimental, and all 
experiments on feeling are peculiarly difficult. The solutions 
proposed are two. In the first, all affection phenomena are 
primarily divisible into those which are pleasurable and those 
which are the reverse. The main objections to this are that it 
does not explain the infinite variety of phenomena, and that 
it disregards the distinction which most philosophers* admit 
between higher and lower pleasures. The second solution is 
that every sensation has its specific affective quality, though by 
reason of the poverty of language many of these have no name. 
W. Wundt, Outlines of Psychology (trans. C. H. Judd, Leipzig, 
1897), maintains that we may group under three main affective 
directions, each with its negative, all the infinite varieties in 
question; these are (a) pleasure, or rather pleasantness, and the 
reverse, (b) tension and relaxation, (c) excitement and depres- 
sion. These two views are antithetic and no solution has been 
discovered. 

Two obvious methods of experiment have been tried. The 
first, introduced by A. Mosso, the Italian psychologist, consists 
in recording the physical phenomena which are observed to 
accompany modifications of the affective consciousness. Thus 
it is found that the action of the heart is accelerated by pleasant, 
and retarded by unpleasant, stimuli; again, changes of weight 
and volume are found to accompany modifications of affection — 
and so on. Apart altogether from the facts that this investigation 
is still in its infancy and that the conditions of experiment are 
insufficiently understood, its ultimate success is rendered highly 
problematical by the essential fact that real scientific results 
can be achieved only by data recorded in connexion with a 
perfectly normal subject; a conscious or interested subject 
introduces variable factors which are probably incalculable. 

The second is Fechner's method; it consists of recording the 
changes in feeling-tone produced in a subject by bringing him 
in contact with a series of conditions, objects or stimuli graduated 
according to a scientific plan and presented singly in pairs or in 
groups. The result is a comparative table of likes and dislikes. 

Mention should also be made of a third method which has 
hardly yet been tried, namely, that of endeavouring to isolate 
one of the three " directions " by the method of suggestion or 
even hypnotic trance observations. 

For the subject of emotion in general see modern text-books of 
psychology, e.g. those of J. Sully, W. James, G. T. Fechner, O. 
Kiilpe; Angelo Mosso, La Paura (Milan, 1884, 1900; Eng. trans. 
E. Lough and F. Kiesow, Lond. 1896); E. B. Titchener, Experi- 
mental Psychology (1905) ; art. Psychology and works there quoted. 

AFFIDAVIT (Med. Lat. for " he has declared upon oath," 
from affidare, fides, faith), a written statement sworn or affirmed 
to before some person who has authority to administer an oath 
or affirmation. Evidence is chiefly taken by means of affidavits 
in the Chancery Division of the High Court of Justice in England 



on a petition, summons or motion. Interlocutory proceedings 
before trial are conducted by affidavits, e.g. for discovery of 
documents, hence called affidavit of documents. Affidavits are 
sometimes necessary as certificates that certain formalities have 
been duly and legally performed (such as service of proceed- 
ings, &c.). They are extensively used in bankruptcy practice, 
in the administration of the revenue and in the inferior and 
county courts. In testamentary causes, all documents of any 
kind, such as wills, codicils, drafts or instructions of same must 
be filed in the form of affidavits (termed affidavits of scripts). 
In Scotland the testimony of witnesses by affidavit is almost 
unknown, except in a few non-contentious cases as prima facie 
evidence. In the rules of the Supreme Court (R.S.C. Ord. 
XXXVIII.) certain formal requirements are laid down for all 
affidavits and affirmations in causes or matters depending in 
the High Court. An affidavit must consist of title, body or 
statement and jurat. It must be written or printed on foolscap, 
bookwise, in the first person; give correctly the names of the 
parties to the action; and the description and true place of 
abode of the deponent. An affidavit is confined, except on 
interlocutory motions, to such facts as the witness is able of 
his own knowledge to prove. The signature of the deponent 
must be written opposite to the jurat, which must contain the 
place, date and time of swearing, and this signed by the officer 
or magistrate before whom the affidavit is sworn. An affidavit 
sworn on a Sunday is not invalid. Quakers, Moravians and 
Separatists were first privileged to make a solemn declaration 
or affirmation, and by the Common Law Procedure Act 1852 
and other statutes all persons prevented by religious belief from 
taking an oath were allowed to affirm; and, finally, by the Oaths 
Act 1888, every person who objects to be sworn is allowed to 
affirm in all places and for all purposes where an oath is required 
by law. By an act of 1835 justices are permitted to take affi- 
davits in any matter by declaration, and a person making a 
false affidavit in this way is liable to punishment. The same 
act prohibited justices of peace from administering oaths in any 
matter in which they had not jurisdiction as judges, except when 
an oath was specially authorized by statute, as in the bankruptcy 
law, and excepting criminal inquiries, parliamentary proceedings 
and instances where oaths are required to give validity to docu- 
ments abroad. Scottish justices can act in England and vice 
versa. The Oaths Act 1888 and the Commissioner of Oaths 
Act 1889 consolidated all previous enactments relating to oaths 
and gave the lord chancellor power to appoint commissioners 
for oaths to take affidavits for all purposes (see Oath), Under 
the Debtors Act 1869 a plaintiff may file an affidavit for the 
arrest of a debtor {affidavit to hold to bail) when the debt 
amounts to £50 or upwards, where it can be shown that the 
debtor's absence from the kingdom would materially prejudice 
the prosecution of the action. 

Affidavits may be made abroad before any British ambassador, 
envoy, minister, chargS d'affaires, secretary of embassy or lega- 
tion, consul or consular agent. 

In the United States affidavit has the same meaning as in 
England and its general uses are the same, but it is not sub- 
stituted for oral evidence in court to anything like the extent 
to which that is done in the English courts of chancery. The 
statutes of each state designate the persons before whom affi- 
davits may be made outside the state, and special commissioners 
are appointed for that purpose by each state. Affidavits made 
abroad must be made before such commissioners or persons 
so designated, who are usually diplomatic and consular officials, 
justices, notaries public or mayors. " Affidavit of documents " 
is not generally used in the United States; discovery is procured 
by motion. 

AFFILIATION (from Lat. ad-filiare, to adopt as a son), 
in law, the procedure by which the paternity of a bastard child 
is determined, and the obligation of contributing to its support 
enforced. In England a number of statutes on the subject 
have been passed, the chief being the Bastardy Act of 1845, 
and the Bastardy Laws Amendment Acts of 1872 and 1873. 
The mother of a bastard may summon the putative father tq 



AFFINITY— AFFRE 



3° J 



petty sessions within twelve months of the birth (or at any later 
time if he is proved to have contributed to the child's support 
within twelve months after the birth), and the justices, after 
hearing evidence on both sides, may, if the mother's evidence 
be corroborated in some material particular, adjudge the man 
to be the putative father of the child, and order him to pay a 
sum not exceeding five shillings a week for its maintenance, 
together with a sum for expenses incidental to the birth, or the 
funeral expenses, if it has died before the date of order, and the 
costs of the proceedings. An order ceases to be valid after the 
child reaches the age of thirteen, but the justices may in the 
order direct the payments to be continued until the child is 
sixteen years of age. An appeal to quarter sessions is open to 
the defendant, and a further appeal on questions of law to the 
King's Bench by rule nisi or certiorari. Should the child after- 
wards become chargeable to the parish, the sum due by the father 
may be received by the parish officer. When a bastard child, 
whose mother has not obtained an order, becomes chargeable 
to the parish, the guardians may proceed against the putative 
father for a contribution. Any woman who is single, a widow, 
or a married woman living apart from her husband, may make 
an application for a summons, and it is immaterial where the 
child is begotten, provided it is born in England. • An application 
for a summons may be made before the birth of the child, but 
in this case the statement of the mother must be in the form of 
a sworn deposition. The defendant must be over fourteen years 
of age. No agreement on the part of the woman to take a sum 
down in discharge of the liability of the father is a bar to the 
making of an affiliation order. In the case of twins it is usual 
to make separate applications and obtain separate summonses. 
The Summary Jurisdiction Act 1879 makes due provision for 
the enforcement of an order of affiliation. In the case of soldiers 
an affiliation order cannot be enforced in the usual way, but by 
the Army Act 1881, if an order has been made against a soldier 
of the regular forces, and a copy of such order be sent to the 
secretary of state, he may order a portion of the soldier's pay 
to be retained. There is no such special legislation with regard 
to sailors in the royal navy. 

In the British colonies, and in the states of the United States 
(with the exception of California, Idaho, Missouri, Oregon, 
Texas and Utah), there is some procedure (usually termed 
filiation) akin to that described above, by means of which a 
mother can obtain a contribution to the support of her illegitimate 
child from the putative father. The amount ordered to be paid 
may subsequently be increased or diminished (1905; 94 N.Y. 
Supplt. 372). On the continent of Europe, however, the legis- 
lation of the various countries differs rather widely. France, 
Belgium, Holland, Italy, Russia, Servia and the canton of 
Geneva provide no means of inquiry into the paternity of an 
illegitimate child, and consequently all support of the child falls 
upon the mother; on the other hand, Germany, Austria, Norway, 
Sweden, Denmark and the majority of the Swiss cantons pro- 
vide for an inquiry into the paternity of illegitimate children, 
and the law casts a certain amount of responsibility upon the 
father. 

Affiliation, in France, is a term applied to a species of adoption 
by which the person adopted succeeds equally with other heirs 
to the acquired, but not to the inherited, property of the deceased. 
(See Adoption. Also Bastard; Poor Laws.) 

Authorities. — Saunders, Law and Practice of Orders of Affilia- 
tion; Lushington, Law of Affiliation and Bastardy; Little, Poor 
Law Statutes. (T. A. I.) 

AFFINITY (Lat. affinitas, relationship by marriage, from 
affinis, bordering on, related to; finis, border, boundary), in law, 
as distinguished from consanguinity (q.v.), the term applied to 
the relation which each party to a marriage, the husband and 
wife, bears to the kindred of the other. Affinity is usually de- 
scribed as of three kinds. (1) Direct: that relationship which 
subsists between the husband and his wife's relations by blood or 
between the wife and the husband's relations by blood. The 
marriagehaving made them one person, the blood relations of each 
are held as related by affinity in the same degree to the one spouse 



as by consanguinity to the other. But the relation is only with 
the married parties themselves, and does not bring those in 
affinity with them in affinity with each other; so a wife's sister 
has no affinity to her husband's brother. This is (2) Secondary 
affinity. (3) Collateral affinity is the relationship subsisting 
between the husband and the relations of his wife's relations. 

The subject is chiefly important from the matrimonial prohibi- 
tions by which the canon law has restricted relations by affinity. 
Taking the table of degrees within which marriage is prohibited 
on account of consanguinity, the rule has been thus extended 
to affinity, so that wherever relationship to a man himself would 
be a bar to marriage, relationship to his deceased wife will be 
the same bar, and vice versa on the husband's decease. 

Briefly, direct affinity is a bar to marriage. This rule has been 
founded chiefly on interpretations of the eighteenth chapter of 
Leviticus. Formerly by law in England, marriages within the 
degrees of affinity were not absolutely null, but they were liable 
to be annulled by ecclesiastical process during the lives of both 
parties; in other words, the incapacity was only a canonical, 
not a civil, disability. By the Marriage Act 1835 all marriages 
of this kind not disputed before the passing of the act were 
declared absolutely valid, while all subsequent to it were declared 
null. This rendered null in England, and not merely voidable, a 
marriage with a deceased wife's sister or niece. (See Consan- 
guinity; Marriage.) 

AFFINITY, CHEMICAL, the property or relation in virtue of 
which dissimilar substances are capable of entering into chemi- 
cal combination with each other. (See Chemistry; Chemical 
Action; Valency.) 

AFFIRMATION (from Lat. affirmare, to assert), the declara- 
tion that something is true; in logic, a positive judgment, the 
union of the subject and predicate of a proposition; particularly, 
in law, the solemn declaration allowed to those who conscien- 
tiously object to taking an oath. (See Oath.) 

AFFRAY, in law, the fighting of two or more persons in a 
public place to the terror (a V effroi ) of the lieges. The offence is 
a misdemeanour at English common law, punishable by fine and 
imprisonment. A fight in private is an assault and battery, not 
an affray. As those engaged in an affray render themselves also 
liable to prosecution for Assault (q.v.), Unlawful Assembly (see 
Assembly, Unlawful), or Riot (q.v.), it is for one of these 
offences that they are usually charged. Any private person may, 
and constables and justices must, interfere to put a stop to an 
affray. In the United States the English common law as to 
affray applies, subject to certain modifications by the statutes 
of particular states (Bishop, Amer. Crim. Law, 8th ed., 1892, 
vol. i. § 53 s). The Indian Penal Code (sect. 159) adopt j the 
English definition of affray, with the substitution of " actual 
disturbance of the peace " for " causing terror to the lieges." 
The Queensland Criminal Code of 1899 (sect. 72) defines affray 
as taking part in a fight in a public highway or taking part in a 
fight of such a nature as to alarm the public in any other place 
to which the public have access. This definition is taken from 
that in the English Criminal Code Bill of 1880, cl. 96. Under the 
Roman Dutch law in force in South Africa affray falls within the 
definition of vis publica. 

AFFRE, DENIS AUGUSTE (1793-1848), archbishop of Paris, 
was born at St Rome, in the department of Tarn, on the 27th 
of September 1793. He was educated for the priesthood at St 
Sulpice, where in 181 8 he became professor of dogmatic theology. 
After filling a number of ecclesiastical offices, he was elevated to 
the archbishopric of Paris in 1840. Though opposed to the 
government of Louis Philippe, he took no part in politics, but 
devoted himself to his pastoral work. His episcopate, however, 
is chiefly remembered owing to its tragic close. During the 
insurrection of June 1848 the archbishop was led to believe that 
by his personal interference peace might be restored between 
the soldiery and the insurgents. Accordingly, in spite of the 
warning of General Cavaignac, he mounted the barricade at the 
entrance to the Faubourg St Antoine, bearing a green branch 
as sign of peace. He had spoken only a few words, however, 
when the insurgents, hearing some shots, and fancying they 



302 



AFFREIGHTMENT 



were betrayed, opened fire upon the national guard, and the 
archbishop fell, struck by a stray bullet. He was removed to 
his palace, where he died on the 27th of June 1848. Next day 
the National Assembly issued a decree expressing their great 
sorrow on account of his death; and the public funeral on the 
7th of July was one of the most striking spectacles of its kind. 
The archbishop wrote several treatises of considerable value, 
including an Essai sur les hiProglyphes egyptiens (Paris, 1834), 
in which he showed that Champollion's system was insufficient 
to explain the hieroglyphics. 

See Ricard, Les grands eveques de I'eglise de France au XIXe 
Steele (Lille, 1893); L. Alazard, Denis- Auguste Affre, archevique de 
Paris (Paris, 1905). 

AFFREIGHTMENT (from "freight," q.v.). Contract of 
Affreightment is the expression usually employed to describe 
the contract between a shipowner and some other person 
called the freighter, by which the shipowner agrees to carry goods 
of the freighter in his ship, or to give to the freighter the use of 
the whole or part of the cargo-carrying space of the ship for the 
carriage of his goods on a specified voyage or voyages or for a 
specified time; the freighter on his part agreeing to pay a 
specified price, called " freight," for the carriage of the goods 
or the use of the ship. A ship may be let like a house to some 
person who takes possession and control of it for a specified 
term. The ..person who hires a ship in this way occupies during 
the currency of his term the position of shipowner. The contract 
by which a ship is so let may be called a charter-party; but it 
is not, properly speaking, a contract of affreightment, and is 
mentioned here only because it is necessary to remember the 
distinction between a charter-party of this kind, .which is some- 
times called a demise of the ship, and a charter-party which is a 
form of contract of affreightment, as will hereinafter appear. 

The law with regard to the contract of affreightment is, of 
course, a branch of the general law of contract. The rights and 
obligations of the shipowner and the freighter depend, as in the 
case of all parties to contracts, upon the terms of the agreement 
entered into between them. The law, however, interferes to 
some extent in regulating the effect to be given to contracts. 
Certain contracts are forbidden by the law, and being illegal are, 
therefore, incapable of enforcement. The most important 
example of illegality in the case of contracts of affreightment is 
when the contract involves trading with an enemy. The law 
interferes again with regard to the interpretation of the contract. 
The meaning to be given to the words of the contract, or, in 
other words, its construction, when a dispute arises about it, 
must be determined by the judge or court. The result is, that 
certain more or less common clauses in contracts of affreightment 
have come before the courts for construction, and the decisions 
in these cases are treated practically, though not perhaps quite 
logically, as rules of law determining the sense to be put upon 
certain forms of expression in common use in shipping contracts. 
A third way in which the law interferes is by laying down certain 
rules by which the rights of the parties are to be regulated in the 
absence of any express stipulation with regard to the matter 
dealt with by such rules. This is done either by statutory 
enactment, as by that part- (Part VIII.) of the Merchant Shipping 
Act 1894 which deals with the liability of shipowners; or by 
established rules of the unwritten law, the " common law " 
as it is called, as, for instance, the rule that the common 
0/ law. carrier is absolutely responsible for the safe delivery of 
the goods carried, unless it is prevented by t v c act of 
God or the king's enemies. These rules of law, whether common 
law or statute law, regulating the obligations of carriers of goods 
by sea, are of most importance in cases which are uncommon 
though not unknown at the present day, in which there is an 
affreightment without any written agreement of any kind. It 
will, therefore, be convenient to consider first cases of this kind 
where there is no express agreement, oral or written, except as 
to the freight and destination of the goods, and where, conse- 
quently, the rights and obligations of the parties as to all other 
terms of carriage depend wholly upon the rules of law, remember- 
ing always that these same rules apply when there is a written 



contract, except in so far as they are qualified or negatived by 
the terms of such contract. 

The rules of the common or ancient customary law of England 
with.regard to the carriage of goods were no doubt first considered 
by the courts and established with regard to the carriage of 
goods by common carriers on land. These rules were applied to 
common carriers by water, and it may now be taken to be the 
general rule that shipowners who carry goods by sea are by the 
English law subject to the liabilities of common carriers. (See, 
as to the grounds and precise extent of this doctrine, the judg- 
ments in Liver Alkali Company v. Johnson (1874), L.R., 9 Ex. 
338, and Nugent v. Smith (1876) 1 C.P.D. 423.) In practice 
goods are not often shipped without a written contract or 
acknowledgment of the terms upon which they are to be carried. 
For each separate consignment or parcel of goods shipped a 
bill of lading is almost invariably given, and when a whole cargo 
is agreed to be carried the terms are set out in a document called 
a charter-party, signed by or on behalf of the shipowner on the 
one part, and the shipper, who is called the charterer, on the 
other part. But at present we are considering the relations of 
shipowner and shipper independently of any express contract, 
as in a case when goods are shipped and received to be carried 
to the place to which the ship is bound for a certain freight, but 
without any further agreement as to the terms of carriage. In 
such a case the rights of the parties depend on the rules of law, 
or, which is much the same thing, upon the warranties 
or promises which though not expressed must, as the l " f *'™* 
courts have held, be implied as arising from the relation contract 
between the parties as shipper and carrier. The obli- 
gations on the one side and the other may be defined shortly to 
be as follows: — The shipper must not ship goods of a nature or 
in a condition which he knows, or ought, if he used reasonable 
care, to know to be dangerous to the ship, or to other goods, 
unless the shipowner has notice of or has sufficient opportunity 
to observe their dangerous character. The shipper must be 
prepared, without notice from the shipowner, to take delivery 
of his goods with reasonable despatch on the arrival of the ship 
at the place of destination, being ready there to discharge in 
some usual discharging place. The shipper must pay the agreed 
freight, and will not be entitled to claim delivery until the freight 
has been paid. In other words, the shipowner has a lien on the 
goods carried for the freight payable in respect of the carriage. 
On the other hand, the obligation upon the shipowner is first 
and foremost to deliver safely at their destination the goods 
shipped, and this obligation is, by the common law, subject to 
this exception only that the shipowner is not liable for loss or 
damage caused by the act of God or the king's enemies; but by 
statute (Merchant Shipping Act 1894, Part VIII.) it is further 
qualified to this extent that the shipowner is not liable for loss, 
happening without his actual fault or privity, by fire on board 
the ship, or by the robbery or embezzlement of or making away 
with gold or silver or jewellery, the true nature and value of 
which have not been declared in writing at the time of shipment; 
and, further, the shipowner is not liable for damage to or loss of 
goods or merchandise beyond an aggregate amount, not exceeding 
eight pounds per ton for each ton of the ship's tonnage. The 
shipowner is bound by an implied undertaking, or, in other 
words, is made responsible by the law as if he had entered into 
an express undertaking: (1) that the ship is seaworthy; (2) that 
she shall proceed upon the voyage with reasonable despatch, and 
shall not deviate without necessity from the usual course of the 
voyage. 

It is not our purpose in this article to discuss minute or 
doubtful questions; but in their general outline the obligations 
of shipper and shipowner, where no terms of carriage have been 
agreed, except as to the freight and destination of the goods, 
are such as have been described above. The importance of 
appreciating clearly this view of the relations of shipper and 
shipowner arises from the fact that these fundamental rules 
apply to all contracts of affreightment, whether by bill of lading, 
charter-party or otherwise, except in so far as they are modified 
or negatived by the express terms of the contract. 



AFFREIGHTMENT 



303 



Bills of Lading. 

The document signed by the master or agent for the ship- 
owner, by which are acknowledged the shipment of a parcel of 
goods and the terms upon which it is to be carried, is called a 
Bill of Lading. Very many different forms of bills of lading are 
used. For the purpose of illustration the following form (from 
Mr Scrutton's book on Charier-parties and Bills of Lading) has 
been selected as a sample: — 

Shipped, in apparent good order and condition by in 

and upon the good Vessel called the now lying in the port of 

and bound for , with liberty to call at any ports in 

any order, to sail without Pilots, and to tow and assist Vessels in dis- 
tress, and to deviate for the purpose of saving life or property ; 
and to be delivered in the like good order and condition at the afore- 
said port of unto or to his or their assigns, freight 
and all other conditions as per Charter Party. The act of God, perils 
of the sea, fire, barratry of the Master and Crew, enemies, pirates, 
and thieves, arrests, and restraints of princes, rulers, and people, 
collisions; stranding, and other accidents of navigation excepted, 
even when occasioned by negligence, default, or error in judgment 
of the Pilot, Master, Mariners, or other servants of the Shipowners. 

Ship not answerable for losses through explosion, bursting of 
boilers, breakage of shafts, or any latent defect in the machinery or 
hull, not resulting from want of due diligence by the Owners of the 
Ship, or any of them, or by the Ship's Husband or Manager. 

General Average payable according to York-Antwerp Rules. 

In Witness whereof, the Master or Agent of the said Ship hath 
affirmed to three Bills of Lading, all of this tenor and date, drawn 
as first, second and third, one of which Bills being accomplished, the 
others to stand void. 

Dated in this day of 188 . 

The bill of lading is an acknowledgment of the shipment of- 
goods in a named vessel for carriage to a specified destination 
on terms set forth in the document. It is usually signed by the 
master of the vessel, but very commonly by the agents of the 
shipowner or sometimes of the charterers of the vessel. A vessel 
may be employed by its owners to earn freight in various ways: 

(1) It may be placed, as it is said, on the berth as a general ship, 
to receive cargo from any shippers who may desire to send 
goods to the port, or one of the ports, to which the vessel is 
bound. The mate or chief officer usually superintends the load- 
ing, and, as goods are shipped, a mate's receipt is given as an 
acknowledgment of the shipment. The mate's receipt is after- 
wards exchanged for the bill of lading. In the case of a shipment 
by a general ship the bill of lading is the evidence and memor- 
andum of the contract between the shipowner and the shipper. 

(2) A shipper may, however, require the whole cargo space of 
the vessel to carry, for example, a full cargo of grain. In such a 
case the vessel will be chartered by the shipowner to the shipper, 
and the contract will be the charter-party. Even in such a case 
a bill or bills of lading will usually be given to enable the shipper 
to deal more conveniently with the goods by way of sale or 
otherwise. By the ancient custom of merchants recognized 
and incorporated in the law, the bill of lading is a document of 
title, representing the goods themselves, by the transfer of 
which symbolical delivery of the goods may be made. But when 
a cargo is shipped under a charter-party, although bills of lading 
may be given to the charterer, it is the charter-party, and not 
the bills of lading, which constitutes the record of the contract 
between the parties — of charter-parties we shall treat below. (3) 
There is a third class of case which is a combination of the two 
with which we have dealt above. A vessel is very commonly 
chartered by her owner to a charterer who has no intention to 
ship and does not ship any cargo on his own account, but places 
the vessel on the berth to receive cargo from shippers who ship 
under bills of lading. The charterer receives the bill of lading 
freight and pays the charter-party freight, his object being of 
course to obtain a total bill of lading freight in excess of the 
chartered freight, and so make a profit. The master, although 
he usually remains the servant of the shipowner during the term 
of the charter-party, acts nevertheless under the directions and 
on behalf of the charterer in signing bills of lading. The legal 
effect of this situation is that shippers who ship goods under bills 
of lading without knowledge of the terms of the charter-party 
are entitled to look to the shipowner as the person responsible 
to them for the safe carriage of their goods. This right depends 



essentially on the fact that the master who signs the bills of 
lading, although in doing so he is acting for the charterer, remains 
nevertheless the servant of the shipowner, who is not allowed 
to deny as against third persons, who do not know the relations 
between the charterer and the shipowner, that his servant, the 
master of the ship, has the ordinary authority of a master to 
bind his owner by signing bills of lading. 

The forms of bills of lading vary very much, and their clauses 
have been the subject of judicial consideration and decision in a 
vast number of reported cases. The essential particulars, or at 
all events those common to all bills of lading, may be stated as 
follows: 

1. The name of the shipper. 

2. The name of the ship. 

3. The place of loading and destination of the ship. 

4. A description of the goods shipped. 

5. The place of delivery. 

6. The persons to whom delivery is to be made. 

7. The freight to be paid. 

8. The excepted perils. 

9. The shipowner's lien. 

The description of (1) the shipper and (2) the ship calls for no 
remark. The (3) description of the voyage is important, because 
there is, as we have already explained, an implied undertaking 
by the shipowner in every contract of carriage not unnecessarily 
to deviate from the ordinary route of the voyage upon which the 
goods are received to be carried. The consequences of a deviation 
are serious, inasmuch as the shipowner is liable, not only for any ,> 
loss or damage which the shipper suffers in consequence of the 
deviation, but for any loss of goods which occurs after the devia- 
tion, even though such loss is caused by one of the excepted 
perils. The only exception to this rule is that a deviation may 
be made to save life, but not to save property. It is, however, 
very usual to qualify the strictness of this implied undertaking 
by introducing in the bill of lading certain " liberties " to deviate, 
as, for example, in the form given above, " liberty to call at any 
ports in any order, to tow and assist vessels in distress, and to 
deviate for the purpose of saving life and property." The nature 
and extent of the liberty will depend on the words of the contract. 
The inclination of English courts has been to construe clauses 
giving a liberty to deviate somewhat strictly against the ship- 
owner. 

The (4) importance of the description of the goods shipped 
and their condition is obvious, as the contract is to deliver them 
as described and in the like good condition, subject, of course, 
to the exceptions. It must, moreover, be noted that, as against 
the master or person who has himself signed the bill of lading, 
the statement therein of the goods shipped is absolutely con- 
clusive. But as against the shipowner, unless he has himself 
signed the bill of lading, the statement of the goods shipped is 
not conclusive. It is evidence as against him that the goods 
described were shipped, but he is allowed to rebut this evidence 
by proving, if he can, that the goods mentioned, or some of 
them, were not in fact shipped. 

As to (5) the place of delivery, very serious questions frequently 
arise. Primarily, of course, the shipowner is bound to deliver 
at the place named. Should he be prevented by some obstacle 
or difficulty which is of a temporary nature, the vessel must 
wait, and delivery must be made as soon as possible. Where, 
however, the obstacle is permanent, or at all events such as 
must cause unreasonable delay, having regard to the nature 
of the adventure, the shipowner is excused from delivery at the 
place named in the bill of lading, provided the difficulty arises 
from an excepted peril, or in consequence of delivery at the place 
named being forbidden by the law of England, as may happen, 
for example, in the case of a declaration of war between Great 
Britain and the state in which the port named in the bill of lading 
is situate. A party to a contract cannot be held liable for break- 
ing his contract if its performance' has become illegal. There 
may be other cases in which, from the circumstances of the 
voyage and adventure, it must be inferred that the parties 
intended the performance of the contract to be conditional ori 



3°4 



AFFREIGHTMENT 



the existence at the time of performance of a certain state of 
things, the non-existence of which would render performance 
impossible. For instance, if the port named in the bill of lading 
became permanently closed and inaccessible to shipping in 
consequence of an earthquake, it would probably be held that 
the continued existence of the place named as a port was an 
implied condition of the contract, and that the shipowner was 
excused. Where, however, the performance of the contract 
remains lawful, and is not excused by the express terms of the 
contract, or by some implied condition, the shipowner is liable 
for any loss or damage suffered by the shipper by reason of 
his goods not being delivered at the named place, even though 
such delivery has become impossible. There is another reason 
why the precise description of the place of delivery often becomes 
important. It is only on the arrival of the ship at the place 
described as the place of delivery that the obligation of the 
consignee of the goods to take delivery commences. Delay in- 
volves considerable loss and expense to the shipowner. The 
shipper or consignee is not responsible for any delay which 
occurs before the ship has arrived at the place of delivery 
described in the bill of lading. 

(6) The goods may be deliverable by the terms of the bill of 
lading to a named consignee, and to him only, "but more usually 
they are made deliverable to the " order or assigns " of the 
named consignee or of the shipper. If the goods are made 
deliverable to order or assigns the bill of lading is a negotiable 
instrument, or, in other words, the right to the goods, and the 
rights and liabilities under the contract contained in the bill of 
lading, may be transferred by indorsement and delivery of the 
document. When an indorsement has once been made by the 
shipper or consignee writing his name and nothing more on the 
back of the bill of lading, the rights in and under it may be trans- 
ferred from hand to hand by mere delivery. A bill of lading so 
indorsed is said to be indorsed " in blank." But the shipper or 
consignee may restrict the negotiability of the bill of lading by 
indorsing it not " in blank," but with a direction requiring 
delivery to be made to a particular person or indorsee, or to his 
order. This is called an indorsement " in full." When an in- 
dorsement has been made " in full " to a named indorsee or order, 
such indorsee must again indorse " in blank " or " in full " to 
effect a new transfer of the rights in the bill of lading. 

(7) The amount or rate of freight payable is stated in the bill 
of lading, either expressly, or, not uncommonly when the freight 
under the bill of lading is the same as under the charter-party, 
by reference to the charter-party. A common form of such 
reference is " freight and other conditions, as per charter-party." 
It may here be mentioned that this form of words does not in- 
corporate in the contract under the bill of lading all the terms 
and conditions of the charter-party, but only those which apply 
to the person who is to take delivery, and relate to matters 
ejusdem generis, or similar to the payment of freight, such as 
demurrage and the like. The conditions of the charter-party 
thus incorporated do not include, for 'instance, the exceptions 
in the charter-party so as to add them to the exceptions in the 
bill of lading. Freight, unless it is otherwise provided by the 
contract, is payable only on delivery of the goods at their 
destination. If the voyage is interrupted and its completion 
becomes impossible, the shipowner cannot claim payment of 
freight even pro rata itineris. He loses his freight altogether. 
This is so even when the completion of the voyage is prevented 
by causes for which the shipowner is not responsible, such as the 
act of God or the king's enemies, or perils which are within the 
express exceptions in the bill of lading. When the voyage is 
interrupted by accident, and indeed in any case, the goods may, 
by agreement between the shipowner and the consignee, be 
delivered at some place short of their destination upon payment 
of a freight pro rata; that is to say, proportional to the length 
of voyage accomplished, and such an agreement may be implied 
in certain circumstances from the conduct of the consignee in 
taking delivery before they arrive at their destination. In all 
such cases it will be a question of fact whether the goods were in 
fact delivered upon the terms, express or implied, that freight 



pro rata should be paid. As a rule such an agreement would not 
be implied where the shipowner is unable or unwilling to forward 
the goods to their destination, and the owner of the goods, 
therefore, has no option but to take delivery where offered. 

When the ship is disabled and cannot proceed, or she is pre- 
vented by some obstacle from proceeding to the place of delivery 
named in the bill of lading, and the shipowner is unwilling or 
unable to forward the goods by another ship, even though he 
may be excused for his failure to carry the goods to their destina- 
tion, he is not entitled to be paid any part of the freight; and 
the consignee is entitled to have the goods delivered to him 
either at the place where the vessel has taken refuge in her 
disabled condition, or, if the obstacle arises without disablement 
of the vessel, at the place which is nearest and most reasonably 
convenient at the time and in the circumstances when the 
further prosecution of the voyage has to be abandoned. On the 
other hand, after the goods have been shipped, so long as the 
shipowner is ready and willing to carry the goods to their destina- 
tion, or, if the ship is disabled, to forward them to their destina- 
tion by some other ship without unreasonable delay, the owner 
of the goods cannot require the goods to be delivered to him at 
any place short of their destination without payment of the full 
freight. Sometimes the freight, either wholly or in part, is made 
payable in advance. If freight payable in advance has become 
due, even though the ship is lost before it is paid, it must, in 
the absence of some special provision to the contrary, still be 
paid, and freight already paid in advance does not become 
repayable because the goods do not reach their destination. 
If, however, goods upon which freight has been paid in advance 
are lost, and the shipowner is liable for their loss, the amount of 
freight paid in advance must be taken into account in assessing 
the damage recoverable from the shipowner. 

(8) There is no part of the bill of lading which is of greater 
practical importance or which demands more careful considera- 
tion by shipowner and shipper alike than that which sets forth 
the excepted perils: those perils, or in other words causes of 
loss, for which the shipowner is to be exempt from liability. By 
the common law, as we have seen, the exemption of the carrier, 
apart from express contract, extended only to loss by the act 
of God or the king's enemies. The expression " act of God " 
requires a word of explanation. It will be sufficient to say 
that it is not synonymous with force majeure; but it includes 
every loss by force majeure in which human agency, by act or 
negligence, has had no part. The list of excepted perils varies 
much in different forms of bills of lading. In the older forms it 
usually included perils of the seas, robbers and pirates, restraint 
of princes and rulers, fire and barratry (that is, wilful wrong- 
doing) of the master and crew. The list, however, has grown in 
modern times, and is still growing; the tendency being to 
exempt the shipowner from liability for all loss which does not 
arise from his own personal default, or from the negligence of 
his managers or agents in failing to provide a vessel seaworthy 
and fit for the voyage at its commencement. It is important 
to point out in this connexion that there are two duties which 
the shipowner is always presumed to undertake, and which are 
assumed to be unaffected and unqualified by the exceptions, 
unless a contrary intention is very clearly expressed by the 
terms of the contract. In the first place, he undertakes abso- 
lutely that the ship in which the goods are shipped is fit at the 
commencement of the voyage for the service to be performed. 
If during the voyage loss arises even from dangers of the seas or 
other excepted peril which would not have occurred if the vessel 
had been seaworthy and fit for the voyage at its commencement, 
the shipowner is not protected by the exceptions, and is liable 
for the loss. In the second place, there is an implied undertaking 
by the shipowner that all reasonable care will be taken by 
himself, his servants and agents, safely to carry and deliver at 
their destination the goods received by him for carriage. Should 
loss or damage occur during the voyage, though the direct cause 
of such loss or damage be perils of the seas or other excepted 
peril, still the shipowner cannot claim exemption under the 
exceptions, if the shipper can prove that the loss or damage 



AFFREIGHTMENT 



3o$ 



would not have occurred but for the negligence of the master 
or crew, or other servants of the shipowner. The shipowner, in 
other words, is bound, with his servants, to use all reasonable care 
to prevent loss by excepted perils and by any other cause. 

It must not be supposed that even these primary obligations, 

which aje introduced into every contract of affreightment not by 

words but by implication, may not be excluded by the 

i Pr f ss express terms of the contract. It has now become 
stlpula- common form to stipulate that the shipowner shall not 
twos. ^ liable for any loss arising from the negligence of his 

servants, or that he shall not be liable for loss by the excepted perils 
even when brought about by the negligence of his servants. And with 
regard to sea worthiness, it isnot uncommon for the shipownerto stipu- 
late that he shall not be responsible for loss arising even from the 
unseaworthiness of the ship on sailing, provided that due care has 
been taken by the owner and his agents and servants to make the 
ship seaworthy at the commencement of the voyage. There is indeed 
no rule of English law which prevents a shipowner from exempting 
himself by the terms of the bill of lading from liability for damage 
and loss of every kind, whether arising from unseaworthiness or any 
other cause whatsoever. In such a case the goods are carried at 
their owner's risk, and if he desires protection he must obtain it 
by insurance. In this respect the law of England permits greater 
freedom of contract than is allowed by the law of some other states. 
The owners, agents and masters of vessels loading in the United 
States of America are forbidden by an act of Congress, commonly 
called the Harter Act, passed in the year 1893, to insert in their 
contracts of affreightment any clause exempting the shipowner 
from liability for the negligence of his servants; but it is at the 
same time enacted that, provided all reasonable skill and care has 
been exercised by the shipowner to make the vessel seaworthy and 
fit for the voyage at its commencement, the shipowner shall not be 
liable for any loss caused by the negligence of the master or crew 
in the navigation of the vessel, or by perils of the sea or certain 
other causes set forth in the act. It is now very usual to insert 
in the bills of lading of British vessels loading in the United States 
a reference to the Harter Act, incorporating its provisions so as to 
make them terms and conditions of the bill of lading. 

The difficulty of construing the terms of bills of lading with regard 
to the excepted perils, often expressed in obscure and inexact lan- 
guage, has given rise to much litigation, the results of which are 
recorded in the law reports. Where such difficulties arise the ques- 
tion must be, What is the true and natural meaning of the language 
used by the parties? This question is not governed by the general 
rules which we have endeavoured to explain; but the words of the 
contract must always be considered with reference to these rules, 
which are founded upon the well-established customs of merchants 
recognized and formulated by the courts of law. 

(9) The bill of lading sometimes contains a clause as to the 
shipowner's lien. Without any express provision for it the ship- 
owner has by the common law a lien for freight. If it is desired 
to give the shipowner a lien for demurrage (see below) or other 
charges, it must be expressly provided for. The lien is the right 
of the shipowner to retain the goods carried until payment has 
been made of the freight or the demurrage, or other charge for 
which a lien has been given. The lien may be waived, and is lost 
by delivery of the goods, or by any dealing with the consignee 
which is inconsistent with a rfght of the shipowner to retain 
possession of the goods until payment has been made. The ship- 
owner may preserve his lien by landing the goods and retaining 
them in his own warehouse, or by storing them in a public ware- 
house, subject to the conditions required by the Merchant 
Shipping Act 1894. 

Charter-parties. 

Charter-parties are, as we have already explained, either for 
a voyage or for a period of time. (1) A charter-party for a voyage 
is a formal agreement made between the owner of the vessel and 
the charterers by which it is agreed that the vessel " being tight, 
staunch and strong, and every way fitted for the voyage," shall 
load at a certain named place a full cargo either of goods of a 
specified description or of general merchandise, and being so 
loaded shall proceed with all possible despatch either to a specified 
place or-to a place to be named at a specified port of call, and 
there deliver the cargo to the charterers or their assigns. There 
are clauses which provide for the amount of freight to be paid and 
the manner and time of payment; for the time, usually described 
as lay days, to be allowed for loading and discharging, and for the 
demurrage to be paid if the vessel is detained beyond the lay days; 
usually also a clause requiring " the cargo to be brought to and 
taken from alongside at merchant's risk and expense "; a clause 



that the master shall sign bills of lading for the cargo shipped 
either at the same rate of freight as is payable under the charter- 
party or very commonly at any rate of freight (but in this case 
with a stipulation that, if the total bill of lading freight is less 
than the total freight payable under the charter-party, the dif- 
ference is to be paid by the charterers to the master before the 
sailing of the vessel); and there is usually what is called the 
cesser clause, by which the charterer's liability under the charter- 
party is to cease on shipment of the cargo, the shipowner taking 
a lien on the cargo for freight, dead freight and demurrage. The 
charter-party is made subject to exceptions similar to those which 
are found in bills of lading. There are also usually clauses pro- 
viding for the commissions to be paid to the brokers on signing 
the charter-party, the " address " commission to be paid to the 
agents for the vessel at the port of discharge, and other matters 
of detail. The clauses in charter-parties vary, of course, inde- 
finitely, but the above is probably a sufficient outline of the 
ordinary form of a charter-party for a voyage. 

What has been said with regard to bills of lading as to the voyage, 
the place of delivery, the exceptions and excepted perils, and the 
liability of the shipowner and his lien applies equally to charter- 
parties. It may be desirable to add a few words on demurrage, dead 
freight, and on the cesser clause. 

Demurrage is, properly speaking, a fixed sum per day or per hour 
agreed to be paid by the charterer for any time during which the 
vessel is detained in loading or discharging over and above the time 
allowed, which is, as we have said, usually described as the lay days. 
Sometimes the number of days during which the vessel may be kept 
on demurrage at the agreed rate is fixed by the charter-party. If no 
demurrage is provided for by the charter-party, and the vessel is 
kept loading or discharging beyond the lay days, the shipowner is 
entitled to claim damages in respect of the loss which he has suffered 
by the detention of his ship ; or, if the vessel is detained beyond the 
fixed number of demurrage days, damages for detention will be re- 
coverable. Sometimes there is no time fixed by the charter-party 
for loading or discharging. The obligation in such cases is to load 
or discharge with all despatch that is possible and reasonable in the 
circumstances; and if the loading or discharging is not done with 
such reasonable despatch, the shipowner will be entitled to claim 
damages for detention of his ship. The rate of demurrage (if any) 
will generally be accepted as the measure of the damages for deten- 
tion, but is not necessarily the true measure. When the claim is for 
detention and not demurrage the actual loss is recoverable, which 
may be more or may be less than the agreed rate of demurrage. 
The contract usually provides that Sundays and holidays shall be 
excepted in counting the lay days, but unless expressly stipulated 
this exception does not apply to the computation of the period of 
detention after the lay days have expired. 

Dead freight is the name given to the amount of freight lost, and 
therefore recoverable by the shipowner from the charterer as 
damages if a full and complete cargo is not loaded in accordance with 
the terms of the charter-party. 

The cesser clause has come into common use because very fre- 
quently the charterers are not personally interested in the cargo 
shipped. They may be agents merely, or they may have chartered 
the vessel as a speculation to make a profit upon the bill of lading 
freight. The effect of the clause is that when the charterers have 
shipped a full cargo they have fulfilled all their obligations, the ship- 
owner discharging them from all further liability and taking instead 
a lien on the cargo for payment of all freight, demurrage or dead 
freight that may be payable to him. It has become an established 
rule for the construction of the cesser clause that, if the language used 
will permit it, the cesser of liability is assumed to be co-extensive 
only with the lien given to the shipowner; or, in other words, the 
charterers are released from those liabilities only for which a lien 
is given to the shipowner. The shipowner is further secured by the 
stipulation already referred to, that if the total freight payable under 
the bills of lading is less than the full chartered freight the difference 
shall be paid to the shipowner before the vessel sails. A difficulty 
which sometimes arises, notwithstanding these precautions, is that 
although an ample lien is given by the charter-party, the terms ot 
the bills of lading may be insufficient to preserve the same extensive 
lien as against the holder of the bills of lading. The shippers under 
the bills of lading, if they are not the charterers, are not liable for 
the chartered freight, but only for the bill of lading freight; and 
unless the bill of lading expressly reserves it, they are not subject to 
a lien for the chartered freight. The master may guard against this 
difficulty by refusing to sign bills of lading which do not preserve 
the shipowner's lien for his full chartered freight. But he is often 
put into a difficulty by a somewhat improvident clause in- the charter- 
party requiring him to sign bills of lading as presented. See Kruger 
v. Moel Tryvan, 1907 A. C. 272. 

(2) A time charter-party is a contract between the shipowner 
and charterers, by which the shipowner agrees to let and the 



306 



AFGHANISTAN 



charterers to hire the vessel for a specified term for employment, 
either generally in any lawful trade or upon voyages within 
certain limits. A place is usually named at which the vessel is to 
be re-delivered to the owners at the end of the term, and the 
freight is payable until such re-delivery; the' owner almost always 
pays the wages of the master and crew, and the charterers provide 
coals and pay port charges; the freight is usually fixed at a certain 
rate per gross register ton per month, and made payable monthly 
in advance, and provision is made for suspension of hire in certain 
cases if the vessel is disabled; the master, though he usually is 
and remains the servant of the owner, is required to obey the 
orders of the charterers as regards the employment of the vessel, 
they agreeing to indemnify the owners from all liability to which 
they may be exposed by the master signing bills of lading or 
otherwise complying with the orders of the charterers; and the 
contract is made subject to exceptions similar to those in bills of 
lading and voyage charter-parties. This is the general outline 
of the ordinary form of a time charter-party, but the forms and 
their clauses vary, of course, very much, according to the circum- 
stances of each case. 

It is apparent that under a time charter-party the shipowner 
jo a large extent parts with the control of his ship, which is 
employed within certain limits according to the wish and direc- 
tions, and for the purposes and profit of, the charterers. But, as 
we have already explained at the beginning of this article, the 
shipowner continues in possession of his vessel by his servant the 
master, who remains responsible to his owner for the safety and 
proper navigation of the ship. The result of this, as has been 
already pointed out, is that the holder of a bill of lading signed by 
the master, if he has taken the bill of lading without knowledge 
of the terms of the time charter-party, may hold the owner 
responsible for the due performance of the contract signed by 
the master in the ordinary course of his duties, and within his 
ostensible authority as servant of the shipowner, although in fact 
in signing the bill of lading the master was acting as agent for and 
at the direction of the time charterer, and not the shipowner. In 
the language of the ordinary time charter-party the ship is let to 
the charterers; but there is no true demise, because, as we have 
pointed out, the vessel remains in the possession of the shipowner, 
the charterer enjoying the advantages and control of its employ- 
ment. Where the possession of a ship is given up to a hirer, 
who appoints his own master and crew, different considera- 
tions apply; but though the instrument by which the ship is 
let may be called a charter-party, it is not truly a contract of 
affreightment. 

There are certain rights and obligations arising out of the 
relationship of shipowner and cargo-owner in circumstances of 
extraordinary peril or urgency in the course of a voyage, 
rights. which, though not strictly contractual, are well estab- 
lished by the customs of merchants and recognized by 
the law. It is obvious that, when a ship carrying a cargo is in 
the course of a voyage, the master to some extent represents the 
owners of both ship and cargo. In cases of emergency it may be 
necessary that the master should, without waiting for authority 
or instructions, incur expense or make sacrifices as agent not only 
of his employer, the shipowner, but also of the cargo-owner. 
Ship and cargo may be in peril, and it may be necessary for the 
safety of both to put into a port of refuge. There it may be 
necessary to repair the ship, and to land and warehouse, and 
afterwards re-ship the cargo. For these purposes the master will 
be obliged to incur expense, of which some part, such as the cost 
of repairing the ship, will be for the benefit of the shipowner; 
part, such as the warehousing expenses, will be for the benefit of 
the cargo-owner; and part, such as the port charges incurred in 
order to enter the port of refuge, are for the common benefit and 
safety of ship and cargo. Again, in a storm at sea, it may be 
necessary for the safety of ship and cargo to cut away a mast or 
to jettison, that is to say, throw overboard part of the cargo. In 
such a case the master, acting for the shipowner or cargo-owner, 
as the case may be, makes a sacrifice of part of the ship or part of 
the cargo, in either case for the purpose of saving ship and cargo 
from a danger common to both. Voluntary sacrifices so made 



and extraordinary expenses incurred for the common safety are 
called general average (see Average) sacrifices and expenses, 
and are made good to the person who has made the sacrifice or 
incurred the expense by a general average contribution, which is 
recoverable from the owners of the property saved in proportion 
to its value, or, in other words, each contributes rateably accord- 
ing to the benefit received. The law regulating the righls of the 
parties with regard to such contribution is called the law of 
General Average. It must, however, be remembered that the 
owner of the cargo is entitled under the contract of affreightment 
to the ordinary service of the ship and crew for the safe carriage 
of the cargo to its destination, and the shipowner is bound to pay 
all ordinary expenses incurred for the purpose of the voyage. 
He must also bear all losses arising from damage to the ship by 
accidents. But when extraordinary expense has been incurred 
by the shipowner for the safety of the cargo, he can recover such 
expense from the owner of the cargo as a special charge on cargo; 
or when an extraordinary expense has been incurred or a volun- 
tary sacrifice made by the shipowner to save the ship and cargo 
from a peril common to both, he may require the owner of cargo 
, to contribute in general average to make good the loss. 

See Carver, Carriage by Sea (London, 1905) ; Scrutton, Charter- 
parties and Bills of Lading (London, 1904). (W.) 

AFGHANISTAN, a country of Central Asia. Estimated area 
245,000 sq. m. (including Badakshan and Kafiristan). Pop. 
about 5,000,000. It is bounded on the N. by Russian Turkestan, 
on the W. by Persia, and on the E. and S. by Kashmir and the 
independent tribes of the North- West Frontier of India and 
Baluchistan. The chief importance of Afghanistan in modern 
days is due to its position as a " buffer state " intervening be- 
tween the two great empires of Asiatic Russia and British India. 
During the last quarter of the 19th century our knowledge of 
the country was greatly increased, and its boundaries on the 
N., E. and S. were strictly delimited. The second Afghan war 
of 1878-80 afforded an opportunity for the extension of wide 
geographical surveys on a scientific basis. The Russian-Afghan 
Boundary Commission of 1884-1886 resulted in the delimitation 
and mapping of the northern frontier. The Durand agreement 
of 1893 led to the partition of the Pathan tribes on the southern 
and eastern frontiers. The Pamir Commission of 1895 settled 
its north-eastern border. Finally the Perso-Baluch Commission 
of 1904-1905 defined its western face. 

Beginning with the Persian border at Zulfikar on the Hari 
Rud river, the boundary between Afghanistan and Russia follows 
a line roughly parallel to the course of the Paropamisus, and 
about 35 m. to the north of it, till it strikes the Kushk river in 
Jamshidi territory at a point which was once known as Chahil 
Dukteran, but is now the Russian post Kushkinski, and the 
terminus of a branch railway from Merv. Kushkinski is about 
20 m. below the old Jamshidi settlement of Kushk, which is 
the capital of Badghis. The settlement and the post originally 
called Kushk must not be confused together. From Kushk- 
inski the boundary runs north-east, crossing the Murghab river 
near Maruchak (which is an Afghan fortress) , and thence passes 
north-east through the hills of the Chul, and the undulating 
deserts of the Aleli Turkmans, to the Oxus, leaving the valleys 
of Charshamba and of Andkhui (to which it runs approximately 
parallel) within Afghan limits. These valleys denote the limits 
of cultivation in this direction. Throughout all this region the 
boundary is generally of an artificial character, marked by pillars, 
but it is here and there indicated by natural features forming 
local lines of water-parting or water-course. The boundary meets 
the Oxus at Khamiab at the western extremity of the culti- 
vated district of Khwaja Salar, and from that point to the 
eastern end of Lake Victoria in the Pamirs the main channel of 
the Oxus river forms the northern limits of Afghanistan. (See 
Oxus.) Eastwards from Lake Victoria the frontier line was 
determined by the Pamir Boundary Commission of 1895. A 
part of the little Pamir is included in Afghan territory, but the 
boundary crosses this Pamir before the great bend northwards of 
the Aksu takes place, and, passing over a series of crags and un- 
traversable mountain ridges, is lost on the Chinese frontier in the 



AFGHANISTAN 




Doslit o^ 



*? 



REGISTA1 






b° *"* L <-> p) jf bb° Longiludi East 68° of Grcenw 




AFGHANISTAN 



English Miles 
5° 100 '.S c 



Boundary of Afghanistan .Wv 



snowfields of Sarikol. Bending back westwards upon itself, the 
line of Afghan frontier now follows the water-parting of the 
Hindu Kush; and as the Hindu Kush absolutely overhangs the 
Oxus nearly opposite Ishkashim, it follows that, at this point, 
Afghanistan is about 10 m. wide. Thus a small and highly 
elevated portion of the state extends eastwards from its extreme 
north-eastern corner, and is attached to the great Afghan quadri- 
lateral by the thin link of the Panja valley. These narrow limits 
(called Wakhan) include the lofty spurs of the northern flank 
of the Hindu Kush, an impassable barrier at this point, where 
the glacial passes reach 19,000 ft. in altitude, and the enclosing 
peaks 24,000 ft. The backbone or main water-divide of the 
Hindu Kush continues to form the boundary between Afghan- 
istan and those semi-independent native states which fringe 
Kashmir in this mountain region, until it reaches Kafiristan. 
From near the Dorah pass (14,800 ft.), which connects Chitral 
with the Panja (or Oxus) river, a long, straight, snow-clad spur 
reaches southwards, which divides the Kafiristan valley of 
Bashgol from that of Chitral, and this continues to denote the 
eastern limits of Afghanistan till it nearly touches the Chitral 
river opposite the village of Arnawai, 45 m. south of Chitral. 
Here the Bashgol and Chitral valleys unite and the boundary 
passes to the water-divide east of the Chitral river, after crossing 
it by a spur which leaves the insignificant Arnawai valley to 
the north; along this water-divide it extends to a point nearly 
opposite the quaint old town of Pashat in the Kunar valley (the 
Chitral river has become the Kunar in its course southwards), 
and then stretches away in an uneven and undefined line, dividing 
certain sections of the Mohmands from each other by hypo- 
thetical landmarks, till it strikes the Kabul river near Palosi. 



EmcryWalkcr *ft 

Thence following a course nearly due south, it reaches Landi 
Kotal. From the abutment of the Hindu Kush on the Sarikol 
in the Pamir regions to Landi Kotal, and throughout its eastern 
and southern limits, the boundary of Afghanistan touches 
districts which were brought under British political control with 
the formation of the North-West Frontier Provinces of India in 
1901. From the neighbourhood of Landi Kotal the boundary 
is carried to the Safed Koh overlooking the Afridi Tirah, and 
then, rounding off the cultivated portions of the Kurram valley 
below the Peiwar, it crosses the Kaitu and passes to the upper 
reaches of the Tochi. Crossing these again, it is continued on 
the west of Waziristan, finally striking the Gomal river at 
Domandi. South of the Gomal it separates the interests of 
Afghanistan from those of Baluchistan, which here adjoins the 
North-West Frontier Province. From Domandi (the junction 
of the Kundar river with the Gomal) the Afghan boundary 
marches with that of Baluchistan. (See Baluchistan.) It is 
carried to the south-west on a line which is largely defined by 
the channels of the Kundar and the Kadanai to a point beyond 
the Sind-Peshin terminal station of New Chaman, west of the 
Khojak range, and then drops southward to Shorawak and 
Nushki. From Nushki it crosses the Helmund desert, touching 
the crest of a well-defined mountain watershed for a great part 
of the way, and, leaving Chagai to Baluchistan, it strikes nearly 
west to the Persian frontier, and joins it on the Koh-i- Malik Siah 
mountain, south of Seistan. Two points of this part of the 
Afghan boundary are notable. It leaves some of the most 
fanatical of the Durani Afghan people on the Baluch side of the 
frontier in the Toba district, north of the Quetta-Chaman line 
of railway; and it passes 50 m. south of the Helmund river, 



3 o8 



AFGHANISTAN 



enclosing within Afghanistan the only approach to Seistan from 
India which is available during the seasons of Helmund overflow. 
Between Afghanistan and Persia the boundary was defined by 
Sir F. Goldsmid's Commission in 1872 from the Malik-Siah-Koh 
to the Helmund Lagoons, and rectified by the Commission under 
Sir Henry MacMahon in 1903-1905. Beyond these lagoons to 
Hashtadan it is still indefinite. The eastern limits of Hashtadan 
had been previously fixed as far north as the Hari Rud river 
at Toman Agha. From this point to Zulfikar the Hari Rud is 
itself the boundary. 

Within the limits of this boundary Afghanistan comprises 
four main provinces, Northern Afghanistan or Kabul, Southern 

Afghanistan or Kandahar, Herat and Afghan Turkes- 
proviaces. tan > together with the minor dependencies of the 

Ghilzai and Hazara Highlands, Ghazni, Jalalabad and 
Kafiristan. All these are described in separate articles. The 
kingdom of Kabul is the historic Afghanistan; the link which 
unites it to Kandahar, Herat and the other outlying provinces 
having been frequently broken and again restored by amirs of 
sufficient strength and capability. The Herat province is largely 
Persian, while Afghan Turkestan is chiefly Usbeg; and in neither 
is the sentiment of loyalty to the central government very strong. 
The bond is geographical and political rather than racial. The 
geographical divisions of the country are created by the basins 
of its chief rivers, the Kabul, the Helmund, the Hari Rud and 
the Oxus. The Kabul river drains Northern Afghanistan, the 
Hari Rud the province of Herat, and the Oxus that of Afghan 
Turkestan. Afghanistan is largely a country of mountains and 
deserts; but there are wide tracts of highly irrigated and most 
productive country where fruit is grown in such abundance 
as to become an important item in the export trade. The 
Afghans are expert agriculturists' and make profitable use of all 
the natural sources of water-supply. As practical irrigation 
engineers they are only rivalled by the Chinese. 

The dominant mountain system of Afghanistan is the Hindu 
Kush, and that extension westwards of its water-divide which 

is indicated by the Koh-i-Baba to the north-west of 
systems. Kabul, and by the Firozkhoi plateau (Karjistan), 

which merges still farther to the west by gentle 
gradients into the Paropamisus, and which may be traced across 
the Hari Rud to Mashad. 

The culminating peaks of the Koh-i-Baba overlooking the sources 
of the Hari Rud, the Helmund, the Kunduz and the Kabul very 
nearly reach 17,000 ft. in height (Shah Fuladi, the highest, is 16,870), 
and from them to the south-west long spurs divide the upper tribu- 
taries of the Helmund, and separate its basin from that of the Farah 
Rud. These spurs retain a considerable altitude, for they are marked 
by peaks exceeding 1 I ,000 ft. They sweep in a broad band of roughly 
parallel ranges to the south-west, preserving their general direction 
till they abut on the Great Registan desert to the west of Kandahar, 
where they terminate in a series of detached and broken anticlinals 
whose sides are swept by a sea of encroaching sand. The long, 
straight, level-backed ridges which divide the Argandab, the Tarnak 
and Arghastan valleys, and flank the route from Kandahar to Ghazni, 
determining the direction of that route, are outliers of this system, 
which geographically includes the Khojak, or Kwaja Amran, range 
in Baluchistan. 

North of the main water-parting of Afghanistan the broad syn- 
clinal plateau into which the Hindu Kush is merged is traversed 
by the gorges of the Saighan, Bamian and Kamard tributaries of 
the Kunduz, and farther to the west by the Band-i-Amir or Balkh 
river. Between the debouchment of the Upper Murghab from the 
Firozkhoi uplands into the comparatively low level of the valley 
above Bala Murghab, extending eastwards in a nearly straight line 
to the upper sources of the Shibarghan stream, the Band-i-Turkestan 
range forms the northern ridge between the plateau and the sand 
formations of the Chul. It is a level, straight-backed line of sombre 
mountain ridge, from the crest of which, as from a wall, the extra- 
ordinary configuration of that immense loess deposit called the Chul 
can be seen stretching away northwards to the Oxus — ridge upon 
ridge, wave upon wave, like a vast yellow-grey sea of storm-twisted 
billows. The Band-i-Turkestan anticlinal may be traced eastwards 
of the Balkh-ab (the Band-i-Amir) within the folds of the Kara Koh 
to the Kunduz, and beyond ; but the Kara Koh does not mark the 
northern wall of the great plateau nor overlook the sands of the 
Oxus plain, as does the Band-i-Turkestan. Here there intervenes 
a second wide synclinal plateau, of which the northern edge is defined 
by the flat outlines of the Elburz to the south of Mazar-i-Sharif, and 
immediately at the foot of this range lie the alluvial plains of Mazar 



Geology. 



and Tashkurghan. Opposite Tashkurghan the Oxus plain narrows 
to a short 25 m. On the south this great band of roughly un- 
dulating central plateau is bounded by the Koh-i-Baba, to the west 
of Kabul, and by the Hindu Kush to the north and north-east of that 
city. Thus the main routes from Kabul to Afghan Turkestan must 
cross either one or other of these ranges, and must traverse one or 
other of the terrific defiles which have been carved out of them by 
the upper tributaries of the rivers running northwards towards the 
Oxus. Probably in no country in the world are there gathered 
together within comparatively narrow limits so many clean-cut 
waterways, measuring thousands of feet in depth, affording such a 
stupendous system of narrow roadways through the hills. 

After the Hindu Kush and the Turkestan mountains, that range 
which divides Ningrahar (or the valley of Jalalabad) from Kurram 
and the Afridi Tirah, and is called Safed Koh (also the name of the 
range south of the Hari Rud), is the most important, as it is the 
most impressive, in Afghanistan. 

The highest peak of the Safed Koh, Sikaram, is 15,600 ft. above 
sea-level. From this central dominating peak it falls gently towards 
the west, and gradually subsides in long spurs, reaching to within a 
few miles of Kabul and barring the road from Kabul to Ghazni. At 
a point which is not far east of the Kabul meridian an offshoot is 
directed southwards, which becomes the water-parting between the 
Kurram and the Logar at Shutargardan, and can be traced to a 
connexion with the great watershed of the frontier dividing the 
Indus basin from that of the Helmund. This main watershed 
retains its high altitude far to the south. There are peaks measur- 
ing over 12,000 ft. on the divide between the Tochi and the Ghazni 
plains. 

So far as we know at present the geological history of Afghan- 
istan differs widely from that of India. When, somewhere at 
the commencement of the Cretaceous period, the 
peninsula of India was connected by land with Mada- 
gascar and Southern Africa, all Afghanistan, Baluchistan and 
Persia formed part of an area which was not continuously below 
sea-level, but exhibited alternations of land and sea. The end 
of the Cretaceous period saw the beginning of a series of great 
earth movements ushered in by volcanic eruptions on a scale 
such as the earth has never since witnessed, which resulted 
in the upheaval of the Himalayas by a process of crushing 
and folding of the sedimentary rocks till marine fossils were 
forced to an altitude of 20,000 ft. above the sea. It was not 
till the Tertiary age, and even late in that age, that much 
of the land area of Afghanistan was raised above the sea-level. 
Then the ocean gradually retired into the great Central Asian 
depressions. 

Everywhere there have been great and constant changes of level 
since that period, and the process of flexure and the formation of 
anticlinals traversing the northern districts of Afghanistan is a 
process which is still in action. So rapid has been the land elevation 
of Central Afghanistan that the erosive action of rivers has not been 
able to keep pace with that of upheaval ; and the result all through 
Afghanistan (but specially marked in the great central highlands 
between Kabul and Herat) is the formation of those immensely deep 
gorges and defiles which are locally known as daras. One of these, 
in the Astarab, to the south-east of Maimana, is but 30 yds. wide, 
and is enclosed between perpendicular limestone cliffs 1500 ft. high. 
C. L. Griesbach considers that the general outline of the land con- 
figuration has remained much the same since Pliocene times, and 
that the force which brought about the wrinkling of the older de- 
posits still continues to add fold on fcld. The highlands which shut 
off the Turkestan provinces from Southern Afghanistan have afforded 
the best opportunities for geological investigation, and as might be 
expected from their geographical position, the general result of the 
examination of exposed sections leads to the identification of geo- 
logical affinity with Himalayan, Indian and Persian regions. The 
general configuration of the Turkestan highlands has been already 
indicated. 

Against the last great fold which terminates this mountain area 
northwards are ranged the Tertiaries and recent deposits. North 
of Maimana they form low undulating loess hills, in which most 
of the Band-i-Turkestan drainage is lost. This wide-spreading loess 
area, formed partly of wind-blown sand and partly of detritus 
from the mountains, is known as Chul, and merges into the great 
plains south of the Oxus river, a great part of which is covered with 
modern aerial deposits. Beneath this Chul formation the older beds 
of the outer and Turkestan ranges dip and pass to an irregular out- 
crop near the banks of the Oxus. Between the Oxus and the hills 
there has already been formed a rise or flexure in the ground, which 
extends more or less parallel to the northern edge of the hills, and, 
shutting in the cultivated area of the plains, arrests all tributaries 
seeking to effect a junction with theOxus from the south, and leads 
to the formation of marshes and swamps. This appears to be the 
beginning of a new anticlinal which has altered the levels of the 
Balkh plain, and is indicative of those elevating processes which 



AFGHANISTAN 



309 



may have been effective within historic times in changing the climate 
and the agricultural prospects of this part of Central Asia. The Oxus 
itself is steadily encroaching on its right banks and depositing detritus 
on the left. 

No fresh discoveries of minerals likely to be of high economic 
value to Afghanistan have been made of late years. Such as 
are known and worked at present have been worked from very 
ancient times, and their capacity is not likely to develop greatly 
under the Kabul government. The most important feature in 
this connexion which was noted by the geologist of the Russo- 
Afghan Commission is the existence of vast coal beds in northern 
Afghanistan. In 1903 some coal mines were discovered in the 
Jagdalak districts. 

There are no glaciers now to be found in Afghan Turkestan ; but 
evidences of their recent existence are abundant. The great boulder 
bed terraces in some of the valleys of the northern slopes of the 
Ferozkhoi plateau are probably of glacial origin. In the mountains 
west of Kabul glaciers have retired, leaving the moraines perfectly 
undisturbed. They are probably contemporary with the older 
alluvia. (T. H. H.*) 

The oldest rocks which have yet been identified 1 in Afghanistan 
occur along the axis of the main watershed, and have been referred 
Rocks. to t ^ le Carboniferous. At Robat-i-Pai near Herat, for 
example, there is a dark Productus limestone which seems 
to be identical with the Product us limestone of the Central Himalayas. 
These beds are conformably succeeded, along the Central Asian 
watershed, by a continuous series of strata which apparently repre- 
sent the Permian, Trias and Jurassic of Europe. They consist of 
marine beds alternating with freshwater and littoral deposits, 
together with plant beds and coal-seams of considerable thickness. 
The lowest beds of this series, which from their position may belong 
either to the Permian or to the upper part of the Carboniferous, 
have yielded no recognizable fossils; but they include a conglomerate 
which closely resembles the boulder bed near the base of the Talchir 
series in India. The Upper Trias has been definitely identified by 
the occurrence of Halobia and other fossils; while in the higher beds 
of the series marine forms belonging to the middle and upper Jurassic 
have been found. 

The plant beds occur at several horizons, and among the remains 
which have been found in them are several forms which occur 
also in the Gondwana beds of India. There can be no doubt 
that the series as a v/hole is the equivalent of the Gondwana 
system, and when the country has been more closely examined 
the association of marine fossils with Gondwana plants will be of 
the greatest value in determining the precise homotaxis of the 
Indian deposits. 

The Jurassic beds are followed, generally with perfect conformity, 
by the Cretaceous, which covers a large part of Afghan Turkestan 
and probably forms the greater part of the ranges which run south 
and south-west from the principal watershed. The lowest beds 
consist of red grits which contain Neocomian fossils, while the middle 
and upper Cretaceous consist chiefly of limestone and chalk. The 
entire system may be represented in the west, but in the Herat 
province and in Afghan Turkestan the middle Cretaceous seems to 
be absent, and it is probable that, as in other regions, the upper 
Cretaceous covers a much wider area than the lower beds. Tertiary 
and recent deposits are widely spread, filling most of the valleys and 
covering the plains of the Helmund. Eocene beds have not yet been 
proved to exist ; but this is probably owing to the imperfect know- 
ledge of the country, for the formation is known in Persia, Baluch- 
istan and the Suliman Hills. The lower part of the Miocene is 
marine in Herat and Afghan Turkestan; but the upper Miocene is 
usually of freshwater or estuarine origin. In Afghanistan, as in 
other regions near the great Eurasian system of folds, the Miocene 
includes extensive deposits of gypsum and salt. It was during this 
period that the forces which finally raised the country above the 
level of the sea began to take effect. The Pliocene consists entirely 
of freshwater and terrestrial deposits, which were probably laid 
down at the foot of the rising hills and on the floors of the intervening 
valleys. As the elevation continued, they were sometimes involved 
in the folding to which the mountains owe their origin. During 
this period the gradual desiccation of the country continued, and 
wind-blown deposits, such as the loess, began to make their 
appearance. 

Although volcanic cones are known both in Persia and in Baluch- 
istan, none have yet been described in Afghanistan itself. There 
is, however, ample evidence that at several distinct geological periods 
the region has been the seat of great volcanic activity. According to 
C. L. Griesbach, basic volcanic rocks are interbedded with the lowest 
part of the plant-bearing series, and enormous outbursts took place 
during the Neocomian period. But the most important igneous 
masses are the great intrusions of syenitic granite and of basic rock 
which penetrate the Cretaceous beds. These are probably of Eocene 
or of late Cretaceous age. (P. La.) 

1 We owe our knowledge of the geology of Afghanistan almost 
entirely to the observations of C. L. Griesbach, and a summary of 
his researches will be found in Records of the Geological Survey of 
India, vol. xx. (1887), pp. 93-103, with map. 



Omitting the group of northern routes to India from Central 
Asia, which pass between Kashmir and Afghanistan 
through the defiles of Chitral and of the Indus (see passe s, 
Hindu Kush), the highways of Afghanistan may be 
classed under two heads: (1) Foreign trade routes, and (2) 
Internal communications. 

(1) Of the many routes which cross the frontiers of Afghanistan 
the most important commercially are those which connect the Oxus 
regions and the Central Asian khanates with Kabul, and those which 
lead from Kabul, Ghazni and Kandahar to the plains of India. 

Kabul is linked with Afghan Turkestan and Badakshan by three 
main lines of communication across the Koh-i-Baba and the Hindu 
Kush. One of these routes follows the Balkh river to its head from 
Tashkurghan, and then, preserving a high general level of 8000 to 
9000 f t. , it passes over the water-divides separating the upper tribu- 
taries of the Kunduz river, and drops into the valley formed by an- 
other tributary at Bamian. From Bamian it passes over the central 
mountain chain to Kabul either by the well-known passes of Irak 
(marking the water-divide of the Koh-i-Baba) and of Unai (marking 
the summit of the Sanglakh, a branch of the Hindu Kush), or else, 
turning eastwards, it crosses into the Ghorband valley by the Shibar, 
a pass which is considerably lower than the Irak and is very seldom 
snowbound. From the foot of the Unai pass it follows the Kabul 
river, and from the foot of the Shibar it follows the circuitous route 
which is offered by the drainage of the Ghorband valley to Charikar, 
and thence southwards to Kabul. The main points on this route are 
Haibak, Bajgah and Bamian. It is full of awkward grades and 
minor passes, but it does not maintain a high level generally, no pass 
(if the Shibar route be adopted) much exceeding 10,000 ft. That 
this has for centuries been regarded as the main route northward 
from Kabul, the Buddhist relics of Bamian and Haibak bear silent 
witness; but it may be doubted whether Abdur Rahman's talent for 
roadmaking has not opened out better alternative lines. One of his 
roads connects Haibak with the Ghorband valley by the Chahardar 
pass across the Hindu Kush. The pass is high (nearly 14,000 ft.), 
but the road is excellently well laid out, and the route, which, south 
of Haibak, traverses a corner of the Ghori and Baghlan districts of 
Badakshan, is more direct. A third route also passes through 
Badakshan, and connects Kunduz with Charikar by the Khawlk 
pass and Panjshir river. The latter joins the Ghorband close to 
Charikar. The Khawak (11,600 ft.) is not a high pass; the grades 
are easy and the snowfall usually light. This high road is stated (on 
Afghan authority) to be kept open for khafila traffic all the year 
round by the employment of forced labour for clearing snow. It is 
a recently developed route and one of great importance to Kabul, 
both strategically and commercially. 

Routes that pass through the mountain barriers of the frontier 
between Peshawarandthe Gomaloccur at intervals alongthe western 
border, and in the northern section of the Indian frontier they 
are all well marked. The Khyber, Kurram arid Tochi are the best 
known, inasmuch as all these lines of advance into Afghanistan are 
held by British troops or Indian levies. But the Bara valley route 
into the heart of the Afridi Tirah is not to be altogether overlooked, 
although it is not a trade route of any importance. Between Kabul 
and Jalalabad there are two roads, one by the Lataband pass, and 
the other and more difficult by the Khurd-Kabul and Jagdalak 
passes, the latter being the scene of the massacre of a British brigade 
in 1842. Between Jalalabad and Peshawar is the Khyber pass (q.v.). 
The Khyber was not in ancient times the main route of advance from 
Kabul to Peshawar. From Kabul the old route followed the Kabul 
river through the valley of Laghman (or Lamghan, as the Afghans 
call it) over a gentle water-parting into the Kunar valley, leaving 
Ningrahar and Jalalabad to the south. From the Kunar it crossed 
into Bajour by one of several open and comparatively easy passes, 
and from Bajour descended into India either by the Malakand or 
some other contiguous frontier gateway to the plains of Peshawar. 

The Kurram route involves the Peiwar and Shutargardan passes 
(8600 and 10,800 ft. respectively) across the southern extensions of 
the Safed Koh range, and has never been a great trade route, however 
suitable as an alternative military line of advance. 

Trade does not extend largely between Afghanistan and India 
by the Tochi route, being locally confined to the valley and the dis- 
tricts at its head, yet this is the shortest and most direct route 
between Ghazni and the frontier, and in the palmy days of Ghazni 
raiding was the road by which the great robber Mahmud occasionally 
descended on to the Indus plains. . Traces of his raiding and road- 
making are still visible, but it is certain that he made use of the more 
direct route to Peshawar far more frequently than he did of the 
Tochi. The exact nature of the connexion between the head of the 
Tochi and the Ghazni plain is still unknown to us. 

The Gomal is the great central trade route between Afghanistan 
and India; and the position, which is held by a tribal post at Wana, 
will do much to ensure its continued popularity. The Gomal in- 
volves no passes of any great difficulty, although it is impossible to 
follow the actual course of the river on account of the narrow defiles 
which have been cut through the recent conglomerate beds which 
flank the plains of the Indus. It has been carefully surveyed for a 
possible railway alignment; and an excellent road now connects 



3io 



AFGHANISTAN 



Climate. 



Tank (at its foot) with the Zhob line of communications to Quetta, 
and with Wana on the southern flank of Waziristan. The Gomal 
route is of immense importance, both as a commercial and strategic 
line, and in both particulars is of far greater significance than either 
the Kurram or the Tochi. 

(2) Of theinteriorlinesof communication, those which connect the 
great cities of Afghanistan, Herat, Kabul and Kandahar, are obvi- 
ously the most important. Between Kabul and Herat there is no 
" royal " road, the existing route passing over the frequently snow- 
bound wastes that lie below the southern flank of the great Koh-i- 
Baba into the upper valleys of the Hari Rud tributaries. It is a 
waste, elevated, desolate region that the route traverses, and the 
road itself is only open at certain seasons of the year. Between 
Kabul and Kandahar exists the well-known and oft-traversed route 
by Ghazni and Kalat-i-Ghilzai . There is but one insignificant water- 
parting — or kotal — a little to the north of Ghazni; and the road, 
although unmade, may be considered equal to any road of its length 
in Europe for military purposes. Between Kandahar and Herat 
there is the recognized trade route which crosses the Helmund at 
Girishkand passes through Farah and Sabzawar. It includes about 
360 miles of easy road, with spaces where water is scarce. Thereis 
not a pass of any great importance, nor a river of any great difficulty, 
to be encountered from end to end, but the route is flanked on the 
north between Kandahar and Girishk by the Zamindawar hills, con- 
taining the most truculent and fanatical clans of all the Southern 
Afghan tribes. Little need be said of the 65 m. of route between 
Kandahar and the Baluchistan frontier at New Chaman. It is on 
the whole a route across open plains and hard, .stony " dasht"— a 
route which would offer no great difficulties to that railway extension 
from Chaman which has so long been contemplated. A very con- 
siderable trade,now passes along this route to India, in spite of almost 
prohibitive imposts ; but the trade does not follow the railway from 
New Chaman to the eastern foot of the Khojak. Long strings of 
camels may still be seen from the train windows patiently treading 
their slow way over the Khojak pass to Kila Abdullah, whilst the 
train alongside them rapidly twists through the mountain tunnel 
into the Peshin valley. 

The variety of climate is immense, as might be expected. 
Taking the highlands of the country as a whole, there is no 
great difference between the mean temperature of 
Afghanistan and that of the lower Himalayas. Each 
may be placed at a point between 50° and 6o° F. But the remark- 
able feature of Afghan climate (as also of that of Baluchistan) is 
its extreme range of temperature within limited periods. The 
least daily range in the north is during the cold weather, the 
greatest in the hot. For seven months of the year (frpm May 
to November) this range exceeds 30 F. daily. Waves of intense 
cold occur, lasting for several days, and one may have to endure 
a cold of 12 below zero, rising to a maximum of 17° below 
freezing-point. On the other hand the summer temperature is 
exceedingly high, especially in the Oxus regions, where a shade 
maximum of 1 io° to 1 20° is not uncommon. At Kabul, and over 
all the northern part of the country to the descent at Gandamak, 
winter is rigorous, but especially so on the high Arachosian 
plateau. In Kabul the snow lies for two or three months; th*e 
people seldom leave their houses, and sleep close to stoves. At 
Ghazni the snow has been known to lie long beyond the vernal 
equinox; the thermometer sinks to io° and 15° below zero 
(Fahr.); and tradition relates the entire destruction of the 
population of Ghazni by snowstorms more than once. 

At Jalalabad the winter and the climate generally assume an 
Indian character. The summer heat is great everywhere in 
Afghanistan, but most of all in the districts bordering on the 
Indus, especially Sewi, on the lower Helmund and in Seistan. 
All over Kandahar province the summer heat is intense, and the 
simoon is not unknown. The hot season throughout this part of 
the country is rendered more trying by frequent dust storms and 
fiery winds; whilst the bare rocky ridges that traverse the 
country, absorbing heat by day and radiating it by night, render 
the summer nights most oppressive. At Kabul the summer sun 
has great power, though the heat is tempered occasionally by 
cool breezes from the Hindu Kush, and the nights are usually 
cool. At Kandahar snow seldom falls on the plains or lower 
hills; when it does, it melts at once. 

At Herat, though 800 ft. lower than Kandahar, the summer 
climate is more temperate; and, in fact, the climate altogether 
is far from disagreeable. From May to September the wind 
blows from the N.\V. with great violence, and this extends 
across the country to Kandahar. The winter is tolerably mild; 



snow melts as it falls, and even on the mountains does not lie 
long. Three years out of four at Herat it does not freeze hard 
enough for the people to store ice; yet it was not very far from 
Herat, and could not have been at a greatly higher level (at 
Kafir Kala, near Kassan) that, in 1750, Ahmad Shah's army, 
retreating from Persia, is said to have lost 18,000 men from cold 
in a single night. In the northern Herat districts, too, records 
of the coldest month (February) show the mean minimum as 
17° F., and the maximum 38 . The eastern reaches of the Hari 
Rud river are frozen hard in the winter, rapids and all, and the 
people travel on it as on a road. 

The summer rains that accompany the S.W. monsoon in 
India, beating along the southern slopes of the Himalaya, 
travel up the Kabul valley as far as Laghman, though they are 
more clearly felt in Bajour and Panjkora, under the high spurs 
of the Hindu Kush, and in the eastern branches of Safed Koh. 
Rain also falls at this season at the head of Kurram valley. 
South of this the Suliman mountains may be taken as the 
western limit of the monsoon's action. It is quite unfelt in the 
rest of Afghanistan, in which, as in all the west of Asia, the 
winter rains are the most considerable. The spring rain, though 
less copious, is more important to agriculture than the winter 
rain, unless where the latter falls in the form of snow. In the 
absence of monsoon influences there are steadier weather indica- 
tions than in India. The north-west blizzards which occur in 
winter and spring are the most noticeable feature, and their 
influence is clearly felt on the Indian frontier. The cold is then 
intense and the force of the wind cyclonic. Speaking generally, 
the Afghanistan climate is a dry one. The sun shines with 
splendour for three-fourths of the year, and the nights are even 
more clear than the days. Marked characteristics are the great 
differences of summer and winter temperature and of day and 
night temperature, as well as the extent to which change of 
climate can be attained by slight change of place. As the 
emperor Baber said of Kabul, at one day's journey from it you 
may find a place where snow never falls, and at two hours' 
journey a place where snow almost never melts! 

The Afghans vaunt the salubrity and charm of some local 
climates, as of the Toba hills above the Kakar country, and of 
some of the high valleys of the Safed Koh. 

The people have by no means that immunity from disease 
which the bright, dry character of the climate and the fine 
physical aspect of a large proportion of them might lead us to 
expect. Intermittent and remittent fevers are very prevalent; 
bowel complaints are common, and often fatal in the autumn. 
The universal custom of sleeping on the house-top in summer 
promotes rheumatic and neuralgic affections; and in the Koh 
Daman of Kabul, which the natives regard as having the finest 
of climates, the mortality from fever and bowel complaint, 
between July and October, is great, the immoderate use of 
fruit predisposing to such ailments. 

The term Afghan really applies to one section only of the 
mixed conglomeration of nationalities which forms the people 
of Afghanistan, but this is the dominant section known 
as the Durani. The Ghilzai (who is almost as powerful tl J£ a " 
as the Durani) claims to be of Turkish origin; the 
Hazaras, the Chahar-Aimak, Tajiks, Uzbegs, Kafirs and others 
are more or less subject races. Popularly any inhabitant of 
Afghanistan is known as Afghan on the Indian frontier without 
distinction of origin or language; but the language division 
between the Parsiwan (or Persian-speaking Afghan) and the 
Pathan is a very distinct one. The predominance of the Afghan 
in Afghanistan dates from the middle of the 18th century, when 
Ahmad Shah carved out Afghanistan from the previous con- 
quests of Nadir Shah and called it the Durani empire. 

The Durani Afghans claim to be Ben-i-Israel, and insist on 
their descent from the tribes who were carried away captive 
from Palestine to Media by Nebuchadrezzar. Yet they also 
claim to be Pukhtun (or Pathan) in common with all other 
Pushtu-speaking tribes, whom they do not admit to be Afghan. 
The bond of affinity between the various peoples who compose 
the Pathan community is simply the bond of a common language. 



AFGHANISTAN 



3 11 



All of them recognize a common code or unwritten law called 
Pukhtunwali, which appears to be similar in general character 
to the old Hebraic law, though modified by Mahommedan 
ordinances, and strangely similar in certain particulars to 
Rajput custom. Besides their division into clans and tribes, 
the whole Afghan people may be divided into dwellers in tents 
and dwellers in houses; and this division is apparently not 
coincident with tribal divisions, for of several of the great clans 
at least a part is nomad and a part settled. Such, e.g., is the 
case with the Durani and with the Ghilzai. 

The settled Afghans form the village communities, and in 
part the population of the few towns. Their chief occupation 
is with the soil. They form the core of the nation and the 
main part of the army. Nearly all own the land on which they 
live, and which they cultivate with their own hands or by 
hired labour. Roundly speaking, agriculture and soldiering 
are their sole occupations. No Afghan will pursue a handicraft 
or keep a shop, though the Ghilzai Povindahs engage largely in 
travelling trade and transport of goods. As a race the Afghans 
are very handsome and athletic, often with fair complexion and 
flowing beard, generally black or brown, sometimes, though 
rarely, red; the features highly aquiline. The hair is shaved 
off from the forehead to the top of the head, the remainder at 
the sides being allowed to fall in large curls over the shoulders. 
Their step is full of resolution; their bearing proud and apt to 
be rough. 

The women have handsome features of Jewish cast (the last 
trait often true also of the men) ; fair complexions, sometimes 
rosy, though usually a pale sallow; hair braided and plaited 
behind in two long tresses terminating in silken tassels. They 
are rigidly secluded, but intrigue is frequent. 

The Afghans, inured to bloodshed from childhood, are familiar 
with death, and audacious in attack, but easily discouraged by 
failure; excessively turbulent and unsubmissive to law or dis- 
cipline; apparently frank and affable in manner, especially when 
they hope to gain some object, but capable of the grossest 
brutality when that hope ceases. They are unscrupulous in 
perjury, treacherous, vain and insatiable, passionate in vindic- 
tiveness, which they will satisfy at the cost of their own lives and 
in the most cruel manner. Nowhere is crime committed on such 
trifling grounds, or with such general impunity, though when it 
is punished the punishment is atrocious. Among themselves the 
Afghans are quarrelsome, intriguing and distrustful; estrange- 
ments and affrays are of constant occurrence; the traveller 
conceals and misrepresents the time and direction of his journey. 
The Afghan is by breed and nature a bird of prey. If from habit 
and tradition he respects a stranger within his threshold, he yet 
considers it legitimate to warn a neighbour of the prey that is 
afoot, or even to overtake and plunder his guest after he has 
quitted his roof. The repression of crime and the demand of 
taxation he regards alike as tyranny. The Afghans are eternally 
boasting of their lineage, their independence and their prowess. 
They look on the Afghans as the first of nations, and each man 
looks on himself as the equal of any Afghan. 

They are capable of enduring great privation, and make 
excellent soldiers under British discipline, though there are but 
few in the Indian army. Sobriety and hardiness characterize the 
bulk of the people, though the higher classes are too often stained 
with deep and degrading debauchery. The first impression made 
by the Afghan is favourable. The European, especially if he 
come from India, is charmed by their apparently frank, open- 
hearted, hospitable and manly manners; but the charm is not 
of long duration, and he finds that the Afghan is as cruel and 
crafty as he is independent. No trustworthy statistics exist 
showing either present numbers or fluctuations in the population 
of Afghanistan. Within the amir's dominions there are probably 
from four to five millions of people, and of these the vast majority 
are agriculturists. 

The cultivators, including landowners, tenants, hired labourers 
and slaves, represent the working population of the country, and 
as industrious and successful agriculturists they are unsurpassed 
in Asia. They have carried the art of irrigation to great per- 



Religiott. 



fection, and they utilize every acre of profitable soil. Certain 
Ghilzai clans are specially famous for their skill in the construc- 
tion of the karez or underground water-channel. 

The religion of the country throughout is Mahommedan. 
Next to Turkey, Afghanistan is the most powerful Mahommedan 
kingdom in existence. The vast majority of Afghans 
are of the Sunni sect; but there are, in their midst, 
such powerful communities of Shiahs as the Hazaras of the central 
districts, the Kizilbashes of Kabul and the Turis of the Kurram 
border, nor is there between them that bitterness of sectarian 
animosity which is so marked a feature in India. The Kafirs of 
the mountainous region of Kafiristan alone are non-Mahom- 
medan. They are sunk in a paganism which seems to embrace 
some faint reflexion of Greek mythology, Zoroastrian principles 
and the tenets of Buddhism, originally gathered, no doubt, from 
the varied elements of their mixed extraction. Those contiguous 
Afghan tribes, who have not so long ago been converted to the 
faith of Islam, are naturally the most fanatical and the most 
virulent upholders of the faith around them. In and about the 
centre of civilization at Kabul, instances of Ghazism are com- 
paratively rare. In the western provinces about Kandahar 
(amongst the Durani Afghans — the people who claim to be Ben- 
i-Israel), and especially in Zamindawar, the spirit of fanaticism 
runs high, and every other Afghan is a possible Ghazi — a man 
who has devoted his life to the extinction of other creeds. 

Persian is the vernacular of a large part of the non-Afghan 
population, and is familiar to all educated Afghans; it is the 
language of the court and of literature. Pushtu, how- 
ever, is the prevailing language, though it does not a *d* ua * e 
seem to be spoken in Herat, or, roughly speaking, west literature. 
of the Helmund. Turki is spoken in Afghan Turkestan. 
There is a respectable amount of Afghan literature. The oldest 
work in Pushtu is a history of the conquest of Swat by Shaikh 
Mali, a chief of the Yusafzais, and leader in the conquest (a.d. 
1413-24). In 1494 Kaju Khan became chief of the same clan; 
during his rule Buner and Panjkora were completely conquered, 
and he wrote a history of the events. In the reign of Akbar, 
Bayazid Ansari, called Pir-i-Roshan, " the Saint of Light," the 
founder of an heretical sect, wrote in Pushtu; as did his chief 
antagonist, a famous Afghan saint called Akhund Darweza. 
The literature is richest in poetry. Abdur Rahman (17th century) 
is the best known poet. Another very popular poet is Khushal 
Khan, the warlike chief of the Khattaks in the time of Aurangzeb. 
Many other members of his family were poets also. Ahmad 
Shah, the founder of the monarchy, likewise wrote poetry. 
Ballads are numerous. 

Education is confined to most elementary principles in Afghan- 
istan. Of schools or colleges for the purposes of a higher educa- 
tion befitted to the sons of noblemen and the more £ rfuca< / 01 , 
wealthy merchants there are absolutely none; but 
the village school is an ever-present and very open spectacle to 
the passer-by. Here the younger boys are collected and in- 
structed in the rudiments of reading, writing and religious creed 
by the village mullah, or priest, who thereby acquires an early 
influence over the Afghan mind. The method of teaching is 
confined to that wearisome system of loud-voiced repetition 
which is so annoying a feature in Indian schools; and the Koran 
is, of course, the text-book in all forms of education. Every 
Afghan gentleman can read and speak Persian, but beyond 
this acquirement education seems to be limited to the physical 
development of the youth by instruction in horsemanship and 
feats of skill. Such advanced education as exists in Afghan- 
istan is centred in the priests and physicians ; but the ignorance 
of both is extreme. 

The government of Afghanistan is an absolute monarchy under 
the amir, and succession to the throne is hereditary. There are 
five chief political divisions in the country — namely, 
Kabul, Turkestan, Herat, Kandahar and Badakshan, ttonand 
each of which is ruled by a " naib "or governor, who laws. 
is directly responsible to the amir. Under the governors 
of provinces the nobles and kazis (or district judges) dispense 
I justice much in the feudal fashion. There are three classes of 



312 



AFGHANISTAN 



Defence. 



chiefs who form the council or durbar of the king. These are 
the sirdars, the khans and the mullahs. The sirdars are 
hereditary nobles, the khans are representatives of the people, 
and the mullahs of Mahommedan religion. The khan is elected 
by the clan or tribe. The clannish attachment of the Afghans is 
rather to the community than to the chief. These three classes of 
representatives are divided into two assemblies, the Durbar Shahi 
or royal assembly, and the Kharwanin Mulkhi or commons. The 
mullahs take their place in one or the other according to their 
individual rank. The executive officials of the amir have a 
selected body, called the Khilwat, which acts as a cabinet council, 
but no member can give advice to the crown without being asked 
to do so, or beyond the jurisdiction of his own department. The 
amir, in addition to being chief executive officer, is chief judge 
and supreme court of appeal. Any one has the right to appeal to 
the amir for trial, and the great amirs, Dost Mahommed and 
Abdur Rahman, were accessible at all times to the petitions of their 
subjects. Next to the amir comes the court of the kazi, the chief 
centre of justice, and beneath the kazi comes the kotwal, who 
performs, as in India, the ordinary functions of a magistrate. In 
large provincial towns there is a punchait, or council, for the 
trial of commercial cases. There are government departments 
for the administration of revenue, customs, post-office, military 
affairs, &c. The general law administered in all the courts of 
Afghanistan is/ihat of Islam and of the customs of the country, 
with developments introduced by the Amir Abdur Rahman. 

The Afghan army probably numbers 50,000 regulars distributed 
between the military centres of Herat, Kandahar, Kabul, Mazar- 

i-Sharif, Jalalabad and Asmar, with detachments at 

frontier outposts on the side of India. Abdur Rahman 
claimed that he could put 100,000 men into the field within a 
week for the defence of Herat. In 1896 he introduced a system 
of semi-enforced service whereby one man in every eight between 
the ages of sixteen and seventy takes his turn at military 
training. In this way he calculated that he could have raised 
1,000,000 men armed with modern weapons, but his chief 
difficulty would be money and transport. The pay of the 
army is apt to be irregular. The amir's factories at Kabul for 
arms and ammunition are said to turn out about, 20,000 
cartridges and 15 rifles daily, with 2 guns per week; but the 
arms thus produced are very heterogeneous, and the different 
varieties of cartridge used would cause endless complications. 
The two chief fastnesses of Northern Afghanistan are Herat 
and Dehdadi near Balkh. The latter fort took twelve years to 
build, and commands all the roads leading from the Oxus into 
Afghan Turkestan. It is armed with naval quick-firing guns, 
Krupp,Hotchkiss, Nordenfeld and Maxim. The chief cantonment 
for the same district is at Mazar-i-Sharif, 12 m. from Balkh. 

Financially, Afghanistan has never, since it first became a 
kingdom, been able to pay for its own government, public works 
Finance an( ^ armv - There appears to be no inherent reason 

why this should be so. Whilst it can never (in the 
absence of any great mineral wealth) develop into a wealthy 
country, it can at least support its own population; and it 
would, but for the short-sighted trade policy of Abdur Rahman, 
certainly have risen to a position of respectable solvency. Its 
revenues (about which no trustworthy information is available) 
are subject to great fluctuations, and probably never exceed the 
value of one million sterling per annum. They fell in Shere Ali's 
time to £700,000. The original subsidy to the amir from the 
Indian government was fixed at 12 lakhs of rupees (£80,000) 
per annum, but in 1893, in connexion with the boundary settle- 
ment, it was increased to £1 20,000. 

Few minerals are wrought in Afghanistan, though Abdur 
Rahman claims in his autobiography that the country is rich 
Minerals * n mmes - Some small quantity of gold is taken from 

the streams in Laghman and the adjoining districts. 
Famous silver mines were formerly worked near the head of the 
Panjshir valley in Hindu Kush. Kabul is chiefly supplied 
with iron from the Permuli (or Farmuli) district, between the 
Upper Kurram and Gomal, where it is said to be abundant. 
Iron ore is most abundant near the passes leading to Bamian, 



and in other parts of Hindu Kush. Copper ore from various 
parts of Afghanistan has been seen, but it is nowhere worked. 
Lead is found in Upper Bangash (Kurram district), and in the 
Shinwari country (also among the branches of Saf ed Koh) , and 
in the Kakar country. There are reported to be rich lead mines 
near Herat scarcely worked. Lead, with antimony, is found 
near the Arghand-ab, 32 m. north-west of Ghazni, and in the 
Ghorband valley, north of Kabul. Most of the lead used, how- 
ever, comes from the Hazara country, where the ore is described 
as being gathered on the surface. An ancient mine of great 
extent and elaborate character exists at Feringal, in the Ghor- 
band valley. Antimony is obtained in considerable quantities 
at Shah-Maksud, about 30 m. north of Kandahar. Sulphur is 
said to be found at Herat, dug from the soil in small fragments, 
but the chief supply comes from the Hazara country and from 
Pirkisri, on the confines of Seistan, where there would seem 
to be a crater, or fumarole. Sal-ammoniac is brought from the 
same place. Gypsum is found in large quantities in the plain of 
Kandahar, being dug out in fragile coralline masses from near 
the surface. Coal (perhaps lignite) is said to be found in Zurmat 
(between the Upper Kurram and the Gomal) and near Ghazni. 
Nitre abounds in the soil over all the south-west of Afghanistan, 
and often affects the water of the karez or subterranean canals. 
The characteristic distribution of vegetation on the mountains 
of Afghanistan is worthy of attention. The great 
mass of it is confined to the main ranges and their Vegeta- 
immediate off-shoots, whilst on the more distant and 
terminal prolongations it is almost entirely absent; in fact, 
these are naked rock and stone. 

Take, for example, the Safed Koh. On the alpine ranee itself and 
its immediate branches, at a height of 6000 to 10,000 ft., we have 
abundant growth of large forest trees, among which conifers are the 
most noble and prominent, such as Cedrus Deodara, Abies excelsa, 
Pinus longijolia, P. Pinaster, P. Pinea (the edible pine) and the larch. 
We have also the yew, the hazel, juniper, walnut, wild peach and 
almond. Growing under the shade of these are several varieties of 
rose, honeysuckle, currant, gooseberry, hawthorn, rhododendron 
and a luxuriant herbage, among which the ranunculus family is im- 
portant for frequency and number of genera. The lemon and wild 
vine are also here met with, but are more common on the northern 
mountains. The walnut and oak (evergreen, holly-leaved and 
kermes) descend to the secondary heights, where they become mixed 
with alder, ash, khinjak, Arbor-vitae, juniper, with species of Astra- 
galus, &c. Here also are Indigoferae and dwarf laburnum. 

Lower again, and down to 3000 ft. we have wild olive, species of 
rock-rose, wild privet, acacias and mimosas, barberry and Zizyphus; 
and in the eastern ramifications of the chain, Chamaerops humilis 
(which is applied to a variety of useful purposes) , Bignonia or trumpet 
flower, sissu, Salvadora persica, verbena, acanthus, varieties of 
Gesnerae. 

The lowest terminal ridges, especially towards the west, are, as 
has been said, naked in aspect. Their scanty vegetation is almost 
wholly herbal ; shrubs are only occasional ; trees almost non-exist- 
ent. Labiate, composite and umbelliferous plants are most common. 
Ferns and mosses are almost confined to the higher ranges. 

In the low brushwood scattered over portions of the dreary plains 
of the Kandahar table-lands, we find leguminous thorny plants of 
the papilionaceous sub-order, such as camel-thorn (Hedysartim 
Alhagi), Astragalus in several varieties, spiny rest-harrow (Ononis 
spinosa), the fibrous roots of which often serve as a tooth-brush; 
plants of the sub-order Mimosae, as the sensitive mimosa ; a plant of 
the rue family, called by the natives lipdd; the common worm- 
wood; also certain orchids, and several species of Salsola. The 
rue and wormwood are in general use as domestic medicines — the 
former for rheumatism and neuralgia; the latter in fever, debility 
and dyspepsia, as well as for a vermifuge. The lipdd, owing to its 
heavy nauseous odour, is believed to keep off evil spirits. In some 
places, occupying the sides and hollows of ravines, are found the 
rose bay (Nerium Oleander), called in Persian khar-zarah, or ass-bane, 
the wild laburnum and various Indigoferae. 

In cultivated districts the chief trees seen are mulberry, willow, 
poplar, ash, and occasionally the plane ; but these are due to man's 
planting. 

One of the most important of these is the gum-resin of Narthex 
asafetida, which grows abundantly in the high and dry plains of 
Western Afghanistan, especially between Kandahar and u ncu ffl. 
Herat. The depot for it is Kandahar, whence it finds its vgtea „'„,. 
way to India, where it is much used as a condiment. It durts ot 
is not so used in Afghanistan, but the Seistan people eat Y atae. 
the green stalks of the plant preserved in brine. The 
collection of the gum-resin is almost entirely in the hands of the 
Kakar clan of Afghans. 



AFGHANISTAN 



3*3 



In the highlands of Kabul edible rhubarb is an important local 
luxury. The plants grow wild in the mountains. The bleached 
rhubarb, which has a very delicate flavour, is altered by covering 
the young leaves, as they sprout from the soil, with loose stones 
or an empty jar. The leaf-stalks are gathered by the neighbouring 
hill people, and carried down for sale. Bleached and unbleached 
rhubarb are both largely consumed, both raw and cooked. 

The walnut and edible pine-nut are both wild growths, which are 
exported. 

The sanjit (Elaeaguns orientalis), common on the banks of water- 
courses, furnishes an edible fruit. An orchis found in the mountain 
yields the dried tuber which affords the nutritious mucilage called 
salep; a good deal of this goes to India. 

Pistacia khinjak affords a mastic. The fruit, mixed with its resin, 
is used for food by the Achakzais in Southern Afghanistan. The true 
pistachio is found only on the northern frontier; the nuts are im- 
ported from Badakshan and Kunduz. 

Mushrooms and other fungi are largely used as food, especially 
by the Hindus of the towns, to whom they supply a substitute for 
meat. 

Manna, of at least two kinds, is sold in the bazaars. One, called 
turanjbiri, appears to exude, in small round tears, from the camel- 
thorn, and also from the dwarf tamarisk; the other, sir-kasht, in 
large grains and irregular masses or cakes with bits of twig imbedded, 
is obtained from a tree which the natives call siah chob (black wood), 
thought by Bellew to be a Fraxinus or Ornus. 

In most parts of the country there are two harvests, as gener- 
ally in India. One of these, called by the Afghans bakdrak, or 
the spring crop, is sown in the end of autumn and 
Jfjtun reaped in summer. It consists of wheat, barley and a 
variety of lentils. The other, called pdizah or tirmdi, 
the autumnal, is sown in the end of spring, and reaped in autumn. 
It consists of rice, varieties of millet and sorghum, of maize, 
Phaseolus Mungo, tobacco, beet, turnips, &c. The loftier regions 
have but one harvest. 

Wheat is the staple food over the greater part of the country. 
Rice is not largely distributed. In much of the eastern moun- 
tainous country bdjra (Holcus spicalus) is the chief grain. Most 
English and Indian garden-stuffs are cultivated; turnips in 
some places very largely, as cattle food. 

The growth of melons, water-melons and other cucurbitaceous 
plants is reckoned very important, especially near towns; and 
this crop counts for a distinct harvest. 

Sugar-cane is grown only in the rich plains; and though 
cotton is grown in the warmer tracts, most of the cotton cloth is 
imported. 

Madder is an important item of the spring crop in Ghazni and 
Kandahar districts, and generally over the west, and supplies 
the Indian demand. It is said to be very profitable, though it 
takes three years to mature. Saffron is grown and exported. 
The castor-oil plant is everywhere common, and furnishes most 
of the oil of the country. Tobacco is grown very generally; 
that of Kandahar has much repute, and is exported to India 
and Bokhara. Two crops of leaves are taken. 

Lucerne and a trefoil called shaflal form important fodder 
crops in the western parts of the country, and, when irrigated, 
are said to afford ten or twelve cuttings in the season. The 
komal (Prangos pabularia) is abundant in the hill country of 
Ghazni, and is said to extend through the Hazara country to 
Herat. It is stored for winter use, and forms an excellent 
fodder. Others are derived from the Holcus sorghum, and from 
two kinds of panick. It is common to cut down the green wheat 
and barley before the ear forms, for fodder, and the repetition 
of this, with barley at least, is said not to injure the grain crop. 
Bellew gives the following statement of the manner in which 
the soil is sometimes worked in the Kandahar district: — Barley 
is sown in November; in March and April it is twice cut for 
fodder; in June the grain is reaped, the ground is ploughed 
and manured and sown with tobacco, which yields two cuttings. 
The ground is then prepared for carrots and turnips, which are 
gathered in November or December. 

Of great moment are the fruit crops. All European fruits 
are produced profusely, in many varieties and of excellent 
quality. Fresh or preserved, they form a principal food of a 
large class of the people, and the dry fruit is largely exported. 
In the valleys of Kabul mulberries are dried, and packed in 
skins for winter use, This mulberry cake is often reduced to 



Fauna, 



flour, and used as such, forming in some valleys the main food 
of the people. 

Grapes are grown very extensively, and the varieties are very 
numerous. The vines are sometimes trained on trellises, but 
most frequently over ridges of earth 8 or 10 ft. high. The 
principal part of the garden lands in villages round Kandahar is 
vineyard, and the produce must be enormous. 

Open canals are usual in the Kabul valley, and in eastern 
Afghanistan generally; but over all the western parts of the 
country much use is made of the karez, which is a subterranean 
aqueduct uniting the waters of several springs, and conducting 
their combined volume to the surface at a lower level. 

As regards vertebrate zoology, Afghanistan lies on the frontier 
of three regions, viz. the Eurasian, the Ethiopian (to 
which region Baluchistan seems to belong) and the 
Indo-Malayan. Hence it naturally partakes somewhat of the 
forms of each, but is in the main Eurasian. 

Felidae. — F. catus, F. chaus (both Eurasian) ; F. caracal (Eur., 
Ind., Eth.), about Kandahar; a small leopard, stated to be found 
almost all over the country, perhaps rather the' cheetah (F. jubatus, 
Ind. and Eth.); F. pardus, the common leopard (Eth. and Ind.). 
The tiger exists in Afghan Turkestan. 

Cantdae. — The jackal (C. aureus, Eur., Ind., Eth.) abounds on 
the Helmund and Argand-ab, and probably elsewhere. Wolves (C. 
Bengalensis) are formidable in the wilder tracts, and assemble in 
troops on the snow, destroying cattle and sometimes attacking 
single horsemen. The hyena (H. striata, Africa to India) is common. 
These do not hunt in packs, but will sometimes singly attack a 
bullock ; they and the wolves make havoc among sheep. A favourite 
feat of the boldest of the young men of southern Afghanistan is to 
enter the hyena's den, single-handed, muffle and tie him. There are 
wild dogs, according to Elphinstone and Conolly. The small Indian 
fox ( Vulpes Bengalensis) is found ; also V. flavescens, common to 
India and Persia, the skin of which is much used as a fur. 

Musielidae. — Species of mungoose (Herpestes) , species of otter, 
Mustela erminea, and two ferrets, one of them with tortoise-shell 
marks, tamed by the Afghans to keep down vermin; a marten (M. 
flavigula, Indian). 

Bears are two: a black one, probably Ursus torquatus; and one 
of a dirty yellow, U. Isabellinus, both Himalayan species. 

Ruminants. — Capra aegagrus and C. megaceros; a wild sheep 
(Ovis cycloceros or Vignei) ; Gazella subgutturosa — these are often 
netted in batches when they descend to drink at a stream ; G. dorcas 
perhaps; Cervus Wattichii, the Indian barasingha, and probably 
some other Indian deer, in the north-eastern mountains. 

The wild hog (Sus scrofa) is found on the lower Helmund. The 
wild ass, Gorkhar of Persia (Equus onager), is frequent on the sandy 
tracts in the south-west. 

The Himalayan varieties of the markhor and ibex are abundant 
in Kafiristan. 

Talpidae. — A mole, probably Talpa Europaea; Sorex Indicus; 
Erinaceus collaris (Indian), and Er. auritus (Eurasian). 

Bats believed to be Phyllorhinus cineraceus (Punjab species), 
Scotophilus Bellii (W. India), Vesp. auritus and V. barbastellus , both 
found from England to India. 

Rodentia. — A squirrel (Sciurus Syriacusf) ; Mus Indicus and M. 
Gerbellinus ; a jerboa (Dipus teluml); Alactaga Bactriana; Gerbil- 
lus Indicus, and G. erythrinus (Persian and Indian); Lagomys Nepal- 
ensis, a Central Asian species. A hare, probably L. ruficaudatus. 

Birds. — The largest list of Afghan birds that we know of is given 
by Captain Hutton in the J. As. Soc. Bengal, vol. xvi. pp. 775 seq. ; 
but it is confessedly far from complete. Of 124 species in that list, 
95 are pronounced to be Eurasian, 17 Indian, 10 both Eurasian and 
Indian, I (Turtur risorius) Eur., Ind. and Eth.; and 1 only, Carpo- 
dacus (Bucanetes) crassirostris, peculiar to the country. Afghanistan 
appears to be, during the breeding season, the retreat of a variety 
of Indian and some African (desert) forms, whilst in winter the 
avifauna becomes overwhelmingly Eurasian. 

Reptiles. — The following particulars are from Gray :— Lizards 
— Pseudopus gracilis (Eur.), Argyrophis Horsfieldii, Salea Horsfieldii, 
Calotes Maria, C. versicolor, C. minor, C. Emma, Phrynocephalus 
Tickelii — all Indian forms. A tortoise (Testudo Horsfieldii) appears 
to be peculiar to Kabul. There are apparently no salamanders or 
tailed Amphibia. The frogs are partly Eurasian, partly Indian; 
and the same may be said of the fish, but they are as yet most 
imperfectly known. 

The camel is of a more robust and compact breed than the tall 
beast used in India, and is more carefully tended. The two- 
humped Bactrian camel is commonly used in the Oxus regions, 
but is seldom seen near the Indian frontier. 

Horses form a staple export to India. The best of these, 
however, are reserved for the Afghan cavalry. Those exported 
to India are usually bred in Maimana and other places in Afghan 



3i4 



AFGHANISTAN 



Turkestan. The indigenous horse is the yabu, a stout, heavy- 
shouldered animal, of about 14 hands high, used chiefly for 
burden, but also for riding. It gets over incredible distances 
at an ambling shuffle, but is unfit for fast work and cannot 
stand excessive heat. The breed of horses was much improved 
under the amir Abdur Rahman, who took much interest in it. 
Generally, colts are sold and worked too young. 

The cows of Kandahar and Seistan give very large quantities 
of milk. They seem to be of the humped variety, but with the 
hump evanescent. Dairy produce is important in Afghan diet, 
especially the pressed and dried curd called krut (an article and 
name perhaps introduced by the Mongols). 

There are two varieties of sheep, both having the fat tail. 
One bears a white fleece, the other a russet or black one. Much 
of the white wool is exported to Persia, and now largely to 
Europe by Bombay. Flocks of sheep are the main wealth of 
the nomad population, and mutton is the chief animal food of 
the nation. In autumn large numbers are slaughtered, their 
carcases cut up, rubbed with salt and dried in the sun. The 
same is done with beef and camel's flesh. 

The goats, generally black or parti-coloured, seem to be a 
degenerate variety of the shawl-goat. 

The climate is found, to be favourable to dog-breeding. 
Pointers are bred in the Kohistan of Kabul and above Jalala- 
bad — large, heavy, slow-hunting, but fine-nosed and staunch; 
very like the old'double-nosed Spanish pointer. There are grey- 
hounds also, but inferior in speed to second-rate English dogs. 

The manufactures of the country have not developed much 
during recent years. Poshtins (sheepskin clothing) and the 
many varieties of camel and goat's hair-cloth which, 
commerce. under the name of " barak," " karak," &c, are manu- 
factured in the northern districts, are still the chief 
local products of that part of Afghanistan. Herat and Kandahar 
are famous for their silks, although a large proportion of the 
manufactured silk found on the Herat market, as well as many of 
the felts, carpets and embroideries, are brought from the Central 
Asian khanates. The district of Herat produces many of the 
smaller sorts of carpets (" galichas " or prayer-carpets), of 
excellent design and colour, the little town of Adraskand being 
especially famous for this industry; but they are not to be 
compared with the best products of eastern Persia or of the 
Turkman districts about Panjdeh. 

The nomadic Afghan tribes of the west are chiefly pastoral, and 
the wool of the southern Herat and Kandahar provinces is famous 
for its quality. In this direction, the late boundary settlements 
have undoubtedly led to a considerable development of local 
resources. A large quantity of wool, together with silk, dried 
fruit, madder and asafetida, finds its way to India by the 
Kandahar route. 

It is impossible to give accurate trade statistics, there being 
no trustworthy system of registration. The value of the imports 
from Kabul to India in 1892-1893 was estimated at 221,000 Rx(or 
tens of rupees). In 1899 it was little over 217,000 Rx, the period 
of lowest intermediate depression being in 1897. These imports 
include horses, cattle, fruits, grain, wool, silk, hides, tobacco, 
drugs and provisions (ghi, &c). All this trade emanates from 
Kabul, there being no transit trade with Bokhara owing to the 
heavy dues levied by the amir. The value of the exports from 
India to Kabul also shows great fluctuation. In the year 1892-1893 
it was registered at nearly 611,000 Rx. In 1894-189511 had sunk 
to 274,000 Rx, and in 1899 it figured at 294,600 Rx. The chief 
items are cotton goods, sugar and tea. In 1 898-1 899 the imports 
from Kandahar to India were valued at 330,000 Rx, and the 
exports from India to Kandahar at about 264,000 Rx. Three- 
fourths of the exports consist of cotton goods, and three-eighths 
of the imports were raw wool. The balance of the imports was 
chiefly made up of dried fruits. Comparison with trade statistics 
of previous years on this side Afghanistan is difficult, owing 
to the inclusion of a large section of Baluchistan and Persia 
within the official " Kandahar " returns; but it does not appear 
that the value of the western Afghanistan trade is much on the 
increase. The opening up of the route between Quetta and 



Seistan has doubtless affected a trade which was already seriously 
hampered by restrictions. In the year after the mission of Sir 
Louis Dane to Kabul in 1905 it was authoritatively stated that 
the trade between Afghanistan and India had nearly doubled in 
value. 

The basin of -the Kabul river especially abounds in remains 
of the period when Buddhism flourished. Bamian is famous 
for its wall-cut figures, and at Haibak (on the route 
between Tashkurghan and Kabul) there are some most ties?" " 
interesting Buddhist remains. In the Koh-Daman, 
north of Kabul, are the sites of several ancient cities, the greatest 
of which, called Beghram, has furnished coins in scores of 
thousands, and has been supposed to represent Alexander's 
Nicaea. Nearer Kabul, and especially on the hills some miles 
south of the city, are numerous topes. In the valley of Jalalabad 
are many remains of the same character. 

In the valley of the Tarnak are the ruins of a great city (Ulan 
Robat) supposed to be the ancient Arachosia. About Girishk, on 
the Helmund, are extensive mounds and other traces of build- 
ings; and the remains of several great cities exist in the plain of 
Seistan, as at Pulki, Peshawaran and Lakh, relics of ancient 
Drangiana. An ancient stone vessel preserved in a mosque 
at Kandahar is almost certainly the same that was treasured 
at Peshawar in the 5th century as the begging pot of Sakya- 
Muni. In architectural relics of a later date than the Graeco- 
Buddhist period Afghanistan is remarkably deficient. Of the 
city of Ghazni, the vast capital of Mahmud and his race, no 
substantial relics survive, except the tomb of Mahmud and two 
remarkable brick minarets. A vast and fruitful harvest of coins 
has been gathered in Afghanistan and the adjoining regions. 

Bibliography. — Rawlinson, England and PMSsiain the East (1875) ; 
H. M. Durand, The First Afghan War (1879) ; Wyllie's Essays on the 
External Policy of India (1875); Elphinstcne, Account of the Kingdom 
of Kabul (1809); Parliamentary Papers, "Afghanistan"; Curzon, 
Problems in the Far East ; Holdich, Indian Borderland^ 1901) ; India 
(1903) ; Indian Survey Reports; Russo-Afghan Boundary Commission 
(1886) ; Pamir Boundary Commission (1896). (T. H. H.*) 

History 

The Afghan chroniclers call their people Beni-Israil (Arab, 
for Children of Israel), and claim descent from King Saul (whom 
they call by the Mahommedan corruption Talilt) through a son 
whom they ascribe to him, called Jeremiah, who again had a 
son called Afghana. The numerous stock of Afghana were 
removed by Nebuchadrezzar, and found their way to the moun- 
tains of Ghor and Feroza (east and north of Herat). Only nine 
years after Mahommed's announcement of his mission they heard 
of the new prophet, and sent to Medina a deputation headed by a 
wise and holy man called Kais, to make inquiry. The deputation 
became zealous converts, and on their return converted their 
countrymen. From Kais and his three sons the whole of the 
genuine Afghans claim descent. 

This story is repeated in great and varying detail in sundry 
books by Afghans, the oldest of which appears to be of the 16th 
century; nor do we know that any trace of the legend is found of 
older date. In the version given by Major Raverty (Introd. to 
Afghan Grammar), Afghanah is settled by King Solomon himself 
in the Sulimani mountains; there is nothing about Nebuchad- 
rezzar or Ghor. The historian Ferishta says he had read that 
the Afghans were descended from Copts of the race of Pharaoh. 
And one of the Afghan histories, quoted by Mr Bellew, relates 
" a current tradition " that, previous to the time of Kais, Bilo 
the father of the Biluchis, Uzbak (evidently the father of the 
Usbegs) and Afghana were considered as brethren. As Mahom- 
med Usbeg Khan, the eponymus of the medley of Tatar tribes 
called Usbegs, reigned in the 14th century a.d., this gives some 
possible light on the value of these so-called traditions. 

We have analogous stories in the literature of almost all 
nations that derive their religion or their civilization from a 
foreign source. To say nothing of the Book of Mormon, a con- 
siderable number of persons have been found to propagate 
the doctrine that the English people are descended from the 
tribes of Israel. But the Hebrew ancestry of the Afghans is 



AFGHANISTAN 



3i5 



more worthy at least of consideration, for a respectable number 
of intelligent officers, well acquainted with the Afghans, have 
been strong in their belief of it ; and though the customs alleged 
in proof will not bear the stress laid on them, undoubtedly a 
prevailing type of the Afghan physiognomy has a character 
strongly Jewish. This characteristic is certainly a remarkable 
one; but it is shared, to a considerable extent, by the Kash- 
miris (a circumstance which led Bernier to speculate on the 
Kashmiris representing the lost tribes of Israel), and, we believe, 
by the Tajik people of Badakshan. 

Relations with the Greeks. — In the time of Darius Hystaspes 
(500 B.C.) we find the region now called Afghanistan embraced 
in the Achaemenian satrapies, and various parts of it occupied 
by Sarangians (in Seistan), Arians (in Herat), Sattagydians 
(supposed in highlands of upper Helmund and the plateau of 
Ghazni), Dadicae (suggested to be Tajiks), Aparytae (mountain- 
eers, perhaps of Safed Koh, where lay the Paryetae of Ptolemy), 
Gandarii (in Lower Kabul basin) and Paktyes, on or near the 
Indus. In the last name it has been plausibly suggested that 
we have the Pukhtun, as the eastern Afghans pronounce their 
name. Indeed, Pusht, Pasht or Pakht would seem to be the 
oldest name of the country of the Afghans in their traditions. 

The Ariana of Strabo corresponds generally with the existing 
dominions of Kabul, but overpasses their limits on the west and 
south. 

About 310'B.c. Seleucus is said by Strabo to have given to 
the Indian Sandrocottus (Chandragupta), in consequence of a 
marriage-contract, some part of the country west of the Indus 
occupied by an Indian population, and no doubt embracing a 
part of the Kabul basin. Some sixty years later occurred the 
establishment of an independent Greek dynasty in Bactria. 
(See Bactria, Media, Eucratides, Menander of India, Euthy- 
demus, and Persia, Ancient History.) Of the details of their 
history and extent of their dominion in different reigns we know 
almost nothing, and conjecture is often dependent on such vague 
data as are afforded by the collation of the localities in which the 
coins of independent princes have been found. But their power 
extended certainly over the Kabul basin, and probably, at times, 
over the whole of Afghanistan. The ancient architecture of 
Kashmir, the tope of Manikyala in the Punjab, arid many 
sculptures found in the Peshawar valley, show unmistakable 
Greek influence. Demetrius (c. 190 B.C.) is supposed to have 
reigned in Arachosia after being expelled from Bactria, much 
as, at a later date, Baber reigned in Kabul after his expulsion 
from Samarkand. Eucratides (181 b.c.) is alleged by Justin 
to have warred in India. With his coins, found abundantly in 
the Kabul basin, commences the use of an Arianian inscription, 
in addition to the Greek, supposed to imply the transfer of rule 
to the south of the mountains, over a people whom the Greek 
dynasty sought to conciliate. Under Heliocles (147 B.C.?), 
the Parthians, who had already encroached on Ariana, pressed 
their conquests into India. Menander (126 B.C.) invaded India 
at least to the Jumna, and perhaps also to the Indus delta. The 
coinage of a succeeding king, Hermaeus, indicates a barbaric 
irruption. There is a general correspondence between classical 
and Chinese accounts of the time when Bactria was overrun 
by Scythian invaders. The chief nation among these, called by 
the Chinese Yue-Chi, about 126 B.C. established themselves in 
Sogdiana and on the Oxus in five hordes. Near the Christian 
era the chief of one of these, which was called Kushan, subdued 
the rest, and extended his conquests over the countries south of 
the Hindu Kush, including Sind as well as Afghanistan, thus 
establishing a great dominion, of which we hear from Greek 
writers as Indo-Scythia. (See Yue-Chi.) 

Buddhism had already acquired influence over the people of 
the Kabul basin, and some of the barbaric invaders adopted 
that system. Its traces are extensive, especially in the plains of 
Jalalabad and Peshawar, but also in the vicinity of Kabul. 

Various barbaric dynasties succeeded each other. A notable 
monarch was Kanishka (see India, History) or Kanerkes, whose 
date is variously fixed at from 58 B.C. to a.d. 125, and whose power 
extended over the upper Oxus basin, Kabul, Peshawar, Kashmir 



and probably far into India. His name and legends still filled the 
land, or at least the Buddhist portion of it, 600 years later, when 
the Chinese pilgrim, Hsiian Tsang, travelled in India; they had 
even reached the great Mahommedan philosopher, traveller and 
geographer, Abu-r-Raihan Muhammad al-Blrunl (see BIruni), 
in the nth century; and they are still celebrated in the Mongol 
versions of Buddhist ecclesiastical story. 

Turkoman Dynasties. — In the time of Hsiian Tsang (a.d. 630- 
645) there were both Indian and Turk princes in the Kabul 
valley, and in the succeeding centuries both these races seem 
to have predominated in succession. The first Mahommedan 
attempts at the conquest of Kabul were unsuccessful, though 
Seistan and Arachosia were permanently held from an early 
date. It was not till the end of the 10th century that a Hindu 
prince ceased to reign in Kabul, and it fell into the hands of the 
Turk Sabuktagin, who had established his capital at Ghazni. 
There, too, reigned his famous son Mahmud, and a series of 
descendants, till the middle of the 12 th century, rendering the 
city one of the most splendid in Asia. We then have^a powerful 
dynasty, commonly believed to have been of Afghan race; and 
if so, the first. But the historians give them a legendary descent 
from Zohak, which is no Afghan genealogy. The founder of 
the dynasty was Alauddin, chief of Ghor, whose vengeance for 
the cruel death of his brother at the hands of Bahram the 
Ghaznevide was wreaked in devastating the great city. His 
nephew, Shahabuddin Mahommed, repeatedly invaded India, 
conquering as far as Benares. His empire in India indeed — 
ruled by his freedmen who after his death became independent 
— may be regarded as the origin of that great Mahommedan 
monarchy which endured nominally till 1857. For a brief period 
the Afghan countries were subject to the king of Khwarizm, 
and it was here chiefly that occurred the gallant attempts of 
Jalaluddin of Khwarizm to withstand the progress of Jenghiz 
Khan. 

A passage in Ferishta seems to imply that the Afghans in the 
Sulimani mountains were already known by that name in the 
first century of the Hegira, but it is uncertain how far this may 
be built on. The name Afghans is very distinctly mentioned in 
'Utbi's History of Sultan Mahmud, written about a.d. 1030, 
coupled with that of the Khiljis. It also appears frequently in 
connexion with the history of India in the 13th and 14th cen- 
turies. The successive dynasties of Delhi are generally called 
Pathan, but were really so only in part. Of the Khiljis (1288- 
1321) we have already spoken. The Tughlaks (1321-1421) were 
originally Tatars of the Karauna tribe. The Lodis (1450-1526) 
were pure Pathans. For a century and more after the Mongol 
invasion the whole of the Afghan countries were under Mongol 
rule; but in the middle of the 14th century a native dynasty 
sprang up in western Afghanistan, that of the Kurts, which 
extended its rule over Ghor, Herat and Kandahar. The history 
of the Afghan countries under the Mongols is obscure; but that 
regime must have left its mark upon the country, if we judge 
from the occurrence of frequent Mongol names of places, and 
even of Mongol expressions adopted into familiar language. 

The Mogul Dynasty. — All these countries were included in 
Timur's conquests, and Kabul at least had remained in the 
possession of one of his descendants till 1501, only three years 
before it fell into the hands of another and more illustrious one, 
Sultan Baber. It was not till 1522 that Baber succeeded in 
permanently wresting Kandahar from the Arghuns, a family of 
Mongol descent, who had long held it. From the time of his 
conquest of Hindustan (victory at Panipat, April 21, 1526), 
Kabul and Kandahar may be regarded as part of the empire 
of Delhi under the (so-called) Mogul dynasty which Baber 
founded. Kabul so continued till the invasion of Nadir Shah 
(1738). Kandahar often changed hands between the Moguls 
and the rising Safavis (or Sufis) of Persia. Under the latter it 
had remained from 1642 till 1708, when in the reign of Husain, 
the last of them, the Ghilzais, . provoked by the oppressive 
Persian governor Shahnawaz Khan (a Georgian prince of the 
Bagratid house), revolted under Mir Wais, and expelled the 
Persians. Mir Wais was acknowledged sovereign of Kandahar, 



7i6 



AFGHANISTAN 



and eventually defeated the Persian armies sent against him, 
but did not long survive (d. 1715). 

Mahmud, the son of Mir Wais, a man of great courage and 
energy, carried out a project of his father's, the conquest of 
Persia itself. After a long siege, Shah Husain came forth from 
Ispahan with all his court, and surrendered the sword and 
diadem of the Sufis into the hands of the Ghilzai (October 1722). 
Two years later Mahmud died mad, and a few years saw the end 
of Ghilzai rule in Persia. 

The Durani Dynasty. — In 1737-38 Nadir Shah both recovered 
Kandahar and took Kabul. But he gained the goodwill of the 
Afghans, and enrolled many in his army. Among these was a 
noble young soldier, Ahmad Khan, of the Saddozai family of the 
Abdali clan, who after the assassination of Nadir (1747) was 
chosen by the Afghan chiefs at Kandahar to be their leader, 
and assumed kingly authority over the eastern part of Nadir's 
empire, with the style of Dur-i-Dur&n, " Pearl of the Age," 
bestowing that of Durani upon his clan, the Abdalis. With 
Ahmad Shah, Afghanistan, as such, first took a place among 
the kingdoms of the earth, and the Durani dynasty, which he 
founded, still occupies its throne. During the twenty-six years 
of his reign he carried his warlike expeditions far and wide. 
Westward they extended nearly to the shores of the Caspian; 
eastward he repeatedly entered India as a conqueror. At his great 
battle of Panipat (January 6, 1761), with vastly inferior num- 
bers, he inflicted on the Mahrattas, then at the zenith of their 
power, a tremendous defeat, almost annihilating their vast army; 
but the success had for him no important result. Having long 
suffered from a terrible disease, he died in 1773, bequeath- 
ing to his son Timur a dominion which embraced not only 
Afghanistan to its utmost limits, but the Punjab, Kashmir and 
Turkestan to the Oxus, with Sind, Baluchistan and Khorasan 
as tributary governments. 

Timur transferred his residence from Kandahar to Kabul, 
and continued during a reign of twenty years to stave off the 
anarchy which followed close on his death. He left twenty- 
three sons, of whom the fifth, Zaman Mirza, by help of Payindah 
Khan, head of the Barakzai family of the Abdalis, succeeded in 
grasping the royal power. For many years barbarous wars raged 
between the brothers, during which Zaman Shah, Shuja-ul- 
Mulk and Mahmud successively held the throne. The last 
owed success to Payindah's son, Fatteh Khan (known as the 
"Afghan Warwick "), a man of masterly ability in war and 
politics, the eldest of twenty-one brothers, a family of notable 
intelligence and force of character, and many of these he placed 
over the provinces. Fatteh Khan, however, excited the king's 
jealously by his powerful position, and provoked the malignity 
of the king's son, Kamran, by a gross outrage on the Saddozai 
family. He was accordingly seized, blinded and afterwards 
murdered with prolonged torture, the brutal Kamran striking 
the first blow. 

The Barakzai brothers united to avenge Fatteh Khan. The 
Saddozais were driven from Kabul, Ghazni and Kandahar, and 
with difficulty reached Herat (1818). Herat remained thus till 
Kamran's death (1842), and after that was held by his able and 
wicked minister Yar Mahommed. The rest of the country was 
divided among the Barakzais — Dost Mahommed, the ablest, 
getting Kabul. Peshawar and the right bank of the Indus fell 
to the Sikhs after their victory at Nowshera in 1823. The last 
Afghan hold of the Punjab had been lost long before — Kashmir 
in 1819; Sind had cast off all allegiance since 1808; the Turkes- 
tan provinces had been practically independent since the death 
of Timur Shah. 

The First Afghan War, 1838-42. — In 1809, in consequence of 
the intrigues of Napoleon in Persia, the Hon. Mountstuart 
Elphinstone had been sent as envoy to Shah Shuja, then in power, 
and had been well received by him at Peshawar. This was the 
first time the Afghans made any acquaintance With Englishmen. 
Lieut. Alex. Burnes (afterwards Sir Alex. Burnes) visited Kabul 
on his way to Bokhara in 1832. In 1837 the Persian siege of 
Herat and the proceedings of Russia created uneasiness, and 
Burnes was sent by the governor-general as resident to the 



amir's court at Kabul. But the terms which the Dost sought 
were not conceded by the government, and the rash resolution 
was taken of re-establishing Shah Shuja, long a refugee in 
British territory. Ranjit Singh, king of the Punjab, bound 
himself to co-operate, but eventually declined to let the expedi- 
tion cross his territories. 

The war began in March 1838, when the "Army of the Indus," 
amounting to 21,000 men, assembled in Upper Sind and advanced 
through the Bolan Pass under the command of Sir John Keane. 
There was hardship, but scarcely any opposition. Kohandil 
Khan of Kandahar fled to Persia. That city was occupied in 
April 1839, an( i Shah Shuja was crowned in his grandfather's 
mosque. Ghazni was reached 21st July; a gate of the city was 
blown open by the engineers (the match was fired by Lieut., 
afterwards Sir Henry, Durand), and the place was taken by 
storm. Dost Mahommed, finding his troops deserting, passed 
the Hindu Kush, and Shah Shuja entered the capital (August 7). 
The war was thought at an end, and Sir John Keane (made a 
peer) returned to India with a considerable part of the force, 
leaving behind 8000 men, besides the Shah's force, with Sir W. 
Macnaghten as envoy, and Sir A. Burnes as his colleague. 

During the two following years Shah Shuja and his allies 
remained in possession of Kabul and Kandahar. The British 
outposts extended to Saighan, in the Oxus basin, and to Mullah 
Khan, in the plain of Seistan. Dost Mahommed surrendered 
(November 3, 1840) and was sent to India, where he was honour- 
ably treated. From the beginning, insurrection against the new 
government had been rife. The political authorities were over- 
confident, and neglected warnings. On the 2nd of November 1841 
the revolt broke out violently at Kabul, with the massacre of 
Burnes and other officers. The position of the British camp, its 
communications with the citadel and the location of the stores 
were the worst possible; and the general (Elphinstone) was 
shattered in constitution. Disaster after disaster occurred, not 
without misconduct. At a conference (December 23) with the 
Dost's son, Akbar Khan, who had taken the lead of the Afghans, 
Sir W. Macnaghten was murdered by that chief's own hand. On 
the 6th of January 1842, after a convention to evacuate the 
country had been signed, the British garrison, still numbering 
4500 soldiers (of whom 690 were Europeans), with some 12,000 
followers, marched out of the camp. The winter was severe, the 
troops demoralised, the march a mass of confusion and massacre, 
and the force was finally overwhelmed in the Jagdalak pass 
between Kabul and Jalalabad. 

On the 13 th the last survivors mustered at Gandamak only 
twenty muskets. Of those who left Kabul, only Dr Brydon 
reached Jalalabad, wounded and half dead. Ninety-five 
prisoners were afterwards recovered. The garrison of Ghazni 
had already been forced to surrender (December 10). But 
General Nott held Kandahar with a stern hand, and General 
Sale, who had reached Jalalabad from Kabul at the beginning of 
the outbreak, maintained that important point gallantly. 

To avenge these disasters and recover the prisoners prepara- 
tions were made in India on a fitting scale; but it was the 16th of 
April 1842 before General Pollock could relieve Jalalabad, after 
forcing the Khyber Pass. After a long halt there he advanced 
(August 20), and gaining rapid successes, occupied Kabul 
(September 15), where Nott, after retaking and dismantling 
Ghazni, joined him two days later. The prisoners were happily 
recovered from Bamian. The citadel and central bazaar of 
Kabul were destroyed, and the army finally evacuated Afghan- 
istan, December 1842. 

This ill-planned and hazardous enterprise was fraught with 
the elements of inevitable failure. A ruler imposed upon a free 
people by foreign arms is always unpopular; he is unable to 
stand alont; and his foreign auxiliaries soon find themselves 
obliged to choose between remaining to uphold his power, or 
retiring with the probability that it will fall after their departure. 
The leading chiefs of Afghanistan perceived that the maintenance 
of Shah Shuja':? rule by British troops would soon be fatal to 
their own power and position in the country, and probably to 
their national independence. They were insatiable in tie** 



AFGHANISTAN 



3*7 



demands for office and emolument, and when they discovered 
that the shah, acting by the advice of the British envoy, was 
levying from among their tribesmen regiments to be directly under 
his control, they took care that the plan should fail. Without a 
regular revenue no effective administration could be organized; 
but the attempt to raise taxes showed that it might raise the 
people, so that for both men and money the shah's government 
was still obliged to rely principally upon British aid. All these 
circumstances combined to render the new regime weak and 
unpopular, since there was no force at the ruler's command 
except foreign troops to put down disorder or to protect those 
who submitted, while the discontented nobles fomented dis- 
affection and the inbred hatred of strangers in race and religion 
among the general Afghan population. 

British and Russian Relations. — It has been said that the 
declared object of this policy had been to maintain the inde- 
pendence and integrity of Afghanistan, to secure the friendly 
alliance of its ruler, and thus to interpose a great barrier of 
mountainous country between the expanding power of Russia in 
Central Asia and the British dominion in India. After 1840, 
when the annexation of the Punjab had carried the Indian north- 
western frontier up to the skirts of the Afghan highlands, the 
corresponding advance of the Russians south-eastward along the 
Oxus river became of closer interest to the British, particularly 
when, in 1856, the Persians again attempted to take possession 
of Herat. Dost Mahommed now became the British ally, but on 
his death in 1863 the kingdom fell back into civil war, until his 
son, Shere Ali, had won his way to undisputed rulership in 1868. 
In the same year Bokhara became a dependency of Russia. To 
the British government an attitude of non-intervention in Afghan 
affairs appeared in this situation to be no longer possible. The 
meeting between the amir Shere Ali and the viceroy of India 
(Lord Mayo) at Umballa in 1869 drew nearer the relations 
between the two governments; the amir consolidated and began 
to centralize his power; and the establishment of a strong, 
friendly and united Afghanistan became again the keynote of 
British policy beyond the north-western frontier of India. 

When, therefore, the conquest of Khiva in 1873 by the 
Russians, and their gradual approach towards the amir's 
northern border, had seriously alarmed Shere Ali, he applied for 
support to the British; and his disappointment at his failure to 
obtain distinct pledges of material assistance, and at Great 
Britain's refusal to endorse all his claims in a dispute with Persia 
over Seistan, so far estranged him from the British connexion 
that he began to entertain amicable overtures from the Russian 
authorities at Tashkend. In 1869 the Russian government had 
assured Lord Clarendon that they regarded Afghanistan as 
completely outside the sphere of their influence; and in 1872 the 
boundary line of Afghanistan on the north-west had been settled 
between England and Russia so far eastward as Lake Victoria. 

Nevertheless the correspondence between Kabul and Tash- 
kend continued, and as the Russians were now extending their 
dominion over all the region beyond Afghanistan on the north- 
west, the British government determined, in 1876, once more to 
undertake active measures for securing their political ascendancy 
in that country. But the amir, whose feelings of resentment 
had by no means abated, was now leaning toward Russia, though 
he mainly desired to hold the balance between two equally 
formidable rivals. The result of overtures made to him from 
India was that in 1877, when Lord Lytton, acting under direct 
instructions from Her Majesty's ministry, proposed to Shere 
Ali a treaty of alliance, Shere Ali showed himself very little 
disposed to welcome the offer; and upon his refusal to admit 
a British agent into Afghanistan the negotiations finally broke 
down. 

Second Afghan War, 1878-80.— In the course of the following 
year (1878) the Russian government, to counteract the inter- 
ference of England with their advance upon Constantinople, 
sent an envoy to Kabul empowered to make a treaty with the 
amir. It was immediately notified to him from India that a 
British mission would be deputed to his capital, but he demurred 
to receiving it; and when the British envoy was turned back 



on the Afghan frontier hostilities were proclaimed by the viceroy 
in November 1878, and the second Afghan War began. Sir 
Donald Stewart's force, marching up through Baluchistan by 
the Bolan Pass, entered Kandahar with little or no resistance; 
while another army passed through the. Khyber Pass and took 
up positions at Jalalabad and other places on the direct road to 
Kabul. Another force under Sir Frederick Roberts marched 
up to the high passes leading out of Kurram into the interior 
of Afghanistan, defeated the amir's troops at the Peiwar Kotal, 
and seized the Shutargardan Pass which commands a direct 
route to Kabul through the Logar valley. The amir Shere Ali 
fled from his capital into the northern province, where he died 
at Mazar-i-Sharif in February 1879. In the course of the next 
six months there was much desultory skirmishing between the 
tribes and the British troops, who defeated various attempts 
to dislodge them from the positions that had been taken up; 
but the sphere of British military operations was not materi- 
ally extended. It was seen that the farther they advanced the 
more difficult would become their eventual retirement; and the 
problem was to find a successor to Shere Ali who could and would 
make terms with the British government. 

In the meantime Yakub Khan, one of Shere Ali's sons, had 
announced to Major Cavagnari, the political agent at the head- 
quarters of the British army, that he had succeeded his father 
at Kabul. The negotiations that followed ended in the con- 
clusion of the treaty of Gandamak in May 1879, by which Yakub 
Khan was recognized as amir; certain outlying tracts of Afghan- 
istan were transferred to the British government; the amir 
placed in its hands the entire control of his foreign relations, 
receiving in return a guarantee against foreign aggression; and 
the establishment of a British envoy at Kabul was at last con- 
ceded. By this convention the complete success of the British 
political and military operations seemed to have been attained; 
for whereas Shere Ali had made a treaty of alliance with, and 
had received an embassy from Russia, his son had now made 
an exclusive treaty with the British government, and had agreed 
that a British envoy should reside permanently at his court. 
Yet it was just this final concession, the chief and original object 
of British policy, that proved speedily fatal to the whole settle- 
ment. For in September the envoy, Sir Louis Cavagnari, with 
his staff and escort, was massacred at Kabul, and the entire 
fabric of a friendly alliance went to pieces. A fresh expedition 
was instantly despatched across the Shutargardan Pass under 
Sir Frederick Roberts, who defeated the Afghans at Charasia 
near Kabul, and entered the city in October. Yakub Khan, 
who had surrendered, was sent to India; and the British army 
remained in military occupation of the district round Kabul 
until in December (1879) its communications with India were 
interrupted, and its position at the capital placed in serious 
jeopardy, by a general rising of the tribes. After they had been 
repulsed and put down, not without some hard fighting, Sir 
Donald Stewart, who had not quitted Kandahar, brought a 
force up by Ghazni to Kabul, overcoming some resistance on 
his way, and assumed the supreme command. Nevertheless 
the political situation was still embarrassing, for as the whole 
country beyond the range of British effective military control 
was masterless, it was undesirable to withdraw the troops before 
a government could be reconstructed which could stand without 
foreign support, and with which diplomatic relations of some 
kind might be arranged. The general position and prospect 
of political affairs in Afghanistan bore, indeed, an instructive 
resemblance to the situation just forty years earlier, in 1840, 
with the important differences that the Punjab and Sind had 
since become British, and that communications between Kabul 
and India were this time secure. 

Reign of Abdur Rahman. — Abdur Rahman, the son of the 
late amir Shere Ali's elder brother, had fought against Shere Ali 
in the war for succession to Dost Mahommed, had been driven 
beyond the Oxus, and had lived for ten years in exile with the 
Russians. In March 1880 he came back across the river, and 
began to establish himself in the northern province of Afghan- 
istan. The viceroy of India, Lord Lytton, on hearing of his 



3 i8 



AFGHANISTAN 



reappearance, instructed the political authorities at Kabul to 
communicate with him. By skilful negotiations a meeting was 
arranged, and after pressing in vain for a treaty he was induced 
to assume charge of the country upon his recognition by the 
British as amir, with the understanding that he should have no 
relations with other foreign powers, and with a formal assurance 
from the viceroy of protection from foreign aggression, so,long 
as he should unreservedly follow the advice of the British govern- 
ment in regard to his external affairs. The province of Kandahar 
was severed from the Kabul dominion; and the sirdar Shere 
AH Khan, a member of the Barakzai family, was installed by 
the British representative as its independent ruler. 

For the second time in the course of this war a conclusive 
settlement of Afghan affairs seemed now to have been attained; 
and again, as in 1879, it was immediately dissolved. In July 
1880, a few days after the proclamation of Abdur Rahman 
as amir at Kabul, came news that Ayub Khan, Shere Ali's 
younger son, who had been holding Herat since his father's 
death, had marched upon Kandahar, had utterly defeated at 
Maiwand a British force that went out from Kandahar to oppose 
him, and was besieging that city. Sir Frederick Roberts at 
once set out from Kabul with 10,000 men to its relief, reached 
Kandahar after a rapid march of 313 miles, attacked and routed 
Ayub Khan's army on the 1st of September, and restored British 
authority in southern Afghanistan. As the British ministry 
had resolved to evacuate Kandahar, the sirdar Shere Ali Khan, 
who saw that he could not stand alone, resigned and withdrew to 
India, and the amir Abdur Rahman was invited to take posses- 
sion of the province. But when Ayub Khan, who had meanwhile 
retreated to Herat, heard that the British forces had retired, 
early in 1881, to India, he mustered a fresh army and again 
approached Kandahar. In June the fort of Girishk, on the 
Helmund, was seized by his adherents; the amir's troops were 
defeated some days later in an engagement, and Ayub Khan 
took possession of Kandahar at the end of July. The amir 
Abdur Rahman, whose movements had hitherto been slow and 
uncertain, now acted with vigour and decision. He marched 
rapidly from Kabul at the head of a force, with which he en- 
countered Ayub Khan under the walls of Kandahar, and routed 
his army on 22nd September, taking all his guns and equipage. 
Ayub Khan fled toward Herat, but as the place had meanwhile 
been occupied by one of the amir's generals he took refuge 
in Persia. By this victory Abdur Rahman's rulership was 
established. 

In 1884 it was determined to resume the demarcation, by a 
joint commission of British and Russian officers, of the northern 
boundary of Afghanistan. The work went on with much diffi- 
culty and contention, until in March 1885, when the amir was 
at Rawalpindi for a conference with the viceroy of India, Lord 
Dufferin, the news came that at Panjdeh, a disputed place on 
the boundary held by the Afghans, the Russians had attacked 
and driven out with some loss the amir's troops. For the 
moment the consequences seemed likely to be serious; but the 
affair was arranged diplomatically, and the demarcation pro- 
ceeded up to a point near the Oxus river, beyond which the 
commission were unable to settle an agreement. 

During the ten years following his accession in 1880 Abdur 
Rahman employed himself in extending and consolidating his 
dominion over the whole country. Some local revolts among 
the tribes were rigorously suppressed; and two attempts to 
upset his rulership — the first by Ayub Khan, who entered 
Afghanistan from Persia, the second and more dangerous one 
by Ishak Khan, the amir's cousin, who rebelled against him 
in Afghan Turkestan — were defeated. By 1801 the amir had 
enforced his supreme authority throughout Afghanistan more 
completely than any of his predecessor?. In 1895 the amir's 
troops entered Kafiristan, a wild mountainous tract on the 
north-east, inhabited by a peculiar race that had hitherto 
defied all efforts to subjugate them, but were now gradually 
reduced to submission. Meanwhile the delimitation of the 
northern frontier, up to the point where it meets Chinese territory 
on the east, was completed and fixed by arrangements between 



the governments of Russia and Great Britain; and the eastern 
border of the Afghan territory, towards India, was also mapped out 
and partially laid down, in accordance with a convention between 
the two governments. The amir not only received a large annual 
subsidy of money from the British government, but he also 
obtained considerable supplies of war material; and he, moreover, 
availed himself very freely of facilities that were given him for 
the importation at his own cost of arms through India. With 
these resources, and with the advantage of an assurance from 
the British government that he would be aided against foreign 
aggression, he was able to establish an absolute military despot- 
ism inside his kingdom, by breaking down the power of the 
warlike tribes which held in check, up to his time, the personal 
autocracy of the Kabul rulers, and by organizing a regular army 
well furnished with European rifles and artillery. Taxation of 
all kinds was heavily increased, and systematically collected. 
The result was that whereas in former times the forces of an 
Afghan ruler consisted mainly of a militia, furnished by the chiefs 
of tribes who held land on condition of military service, and who 
stoutly resisted any attempt to commute this service for money 
payment, the amir had at his command a large standing army, 
and disposed of a substantial revenue paid direct to his treasury. 
Abdur Rahman executed or exiled all those whose political 
influence he saw reason to fear, or of whose disaffection he had 
the slightest suspicion; his administration was severe and his 
punishments were cruel; but undoubtedly he put down disorder, 
stopped the petty tyranny of local chiefs and brought violent 
crime under some effective control in the districts. Travelling 
by the high roads during his reign was comparatively safe; 
although it must be added thai the excessive exactions of dues 
and customs very seriously damaged the external trade. In 
short, Abdur Rahman's reign produced an important political 
revolution, or reformation, in Afghanistan, which rose from the 
condition of a country distracted by chronic civil wars, under 
rulers whose authority depended upon their power to hold down 
or conciliate fierce and semi-independent tribes in the outlying 
parts of the dominion, to the rank of a formidable military state 
governed autocratically. He established, for the first time in 
the history of the. Afghan kingdom, a powerfully centralized 
administration strong enough to maintain order and to enforce 
obedience over all the country which he had united under his 
dominion, supported by a force sufficiently armed and disciplined 
to put down attempts at resistance or revolt. His policy, con- 
sistently maintained, was to permit no kind of foreign inter- 
ference, on any pretext, with the interior concerns or the econo- 
mical conditions of his country. From the British government 
he accepted supplies of arms and subsidies of money; but he 
would make no concessions in return, and all projects of a 
strategical or commercial nature, such as railways and telegraphs, 
proposed either for the defence or the development of his posses- 
sions, seem to have been regarded by the amir with extreme 
distrust, as methods of what has been called pacific penetration 
— so that on these points he was immovable. It was probably 
due to the strength and solidity of the executive administration 
organized, during his lifetime, by Abdur Rahman that, for the 
first time in the records of the dynasty founded by Ahmad Shah 
in the latter part of the 18th century, his death was not followed 
by disputes over the succession or by civil war. 

Succession of Habibullah. — The amir Abdur Rahman died on 
the 1st of October 1901; and two days later his eldest son, 
Habibullah, formally announced his accession to the rulership. 
He was recognized with acclamation by the army, by the religious 
bodies, by the principal tribal chiefs and by all classes of the 
people as their lawful sovereign; while a deputation of Indian 
Mahommedans was despatched to Kabul from India to convey 
the condolences and congratulations of the viceroy. The amir's 
first measures were designed to enhance his popularity and to 
improve his internal administration, particularly with regard to 
the relations of his government with the tribes, and to the 
system introduced by the late amir of compulsory military 
service, whereby each tribe was required to supply a propor- 
tionate number of recruits. With this object a council of state 



AFGHAN TURKESTAN— AFIUM-KARA-HISSAR 



3i9 



for tribal affairs was established; and it was arranged that 
a representative of each tribe shcrald be associated with the 
provincial governors for the adjudication of tribal cases. 

In the important matter of foreign relations Habibullah 
showed a determination to adopt the policy of his father, to 
whom the British government had given an assurance of aid to 
repel foreign aggression, on the condition that the amir should 
follow the advice of that government in regard to external 
affairs. This condition was loyally observed by the new amir, 
who referred to India all communications of an official kind 
received from the Russian authorities in the provinces bordering 
on Afghanistan. But toward the various questions left pending 
between the governments of India and Afghanistan the new amir 
maintained also his father's attitude. He gave no indications of 
a disposition to continue the discussion of them, or to entertain 
proposals for extending or altering his relations with the Indian 
government. An invitation from the viceroy to meet him in 
India, with the hope that these points might be settled in 
conference, was put aside by dilatory excuses, until at last the 
project was abandoned, and finally the amir agreed to receive 
at Kabul a diplomatic mission. The mission, whose chief was 
Sir Louis Dane, foreign secretary to the Indian government, 
reached Kabul early in December 1904, and remained there 
four months in negotiation with the amir personally and with 
his representatives. It was found impossible, after many inter- 
views, to obtain from Habibullah his consent to any addition 
to or variation of the terms of the assurance given by the British 
government in 1880, with which he professed himself entirely 
satisfied, so that the treaty finally settled in March 1905 went no 
further than a formal confirmation of all engagements previously 
concluded with the amir's predecessor. It was felt in British 
circles at the time that a very considerable concession to Habi- 
bullah's independence of attitude was displayed in the fact that 
he was styled in the treaty " His Majesty "; but, in the circum- 
stances, it seems to have been thought diplomatic to accede to 
the amir's determination to insist on this matter of style. But 
the rebuff showed that it was desirable in the interests both of 
the British government and of Afghanistan that an opportunity 
should be made for enabling the amir to have personal acquaint- 
ance with the highest Indian authorities. A further step, 
calculated to strengthen the relations of amity between the two 
governments, was taken when it was arranged that the amir 
should pay a visit to the viceroy, Lord Minto, in India, in 
January 1907; and this visit took place with great cordiality and 
success. 

The Anglo- Russian Convention, signed on the 31st of August 
1907, contained the following important declarations with regard 
to Afghanistan. Great Britain disclaimed any intention of 
altering the political status or (subject to the observance of the 
treaty of 1905) of interfering in the administration or annexing 
any territory of Afghanistan, and engaged to use her influence 
there in no manner threatening to Russia. Russia, on her part, 
recognized Afghanistan as outside her sphere of influence. 

Authorities. — MacGregor, Gazetteer of Afghanistan (1871); 
Elphinstone, Account of the Kingdom of Kabul (1809) ; Ferrier, Histor y 
of the Afghans (1858); Bellew, Afghanistan and the Afghans (1879); 
Baber's Memoirs (1844); Kaye, History of the War in Afghanistan 
(1878); Malleson, History of Afghanistan (1879); Heusman, The 
Afghan War (1881) ; Sir H. M. Durand, The First Afghan War (1879) ; 
Forbes, The Afghan Wars (1892); Rawlinson, England and Russia 
in the East (1875); Wyllie, Essays on the External Policy of India 
(1875) ; A. C. Yate, England and Russia Face to Face in Asia (1887) ; 
C. E. Yate, Northern Afghanistan (1888); Curzon, Problems of the 
Far East (1894); Robertson, The Kafir of the Hindu Kush (1896); 
Holdich, Indian Borderland (1901); Thorburn, Asiatic Neighbours 
(1895); Lord Roberts, Forty-one Years in India (1898); Lady 
Betty Balfour, Lord Lytton's Indian Administration (1899); Hanna, 
Second Afghan War (1899); Gray, At the Court of the Amir (1895); 
Sultan Mohammad Khan, Constitution and Laws of Afghanistan 
(1900); Life of Abdur Rahman (1900); Angus Hamilton, Afghan- 
istan (1906). (H. Y.; A. C.L.) 

AFGHAN TURKESTAN, the most northern province of 
Afghanistan. It is bounded on the E. by Badakshan, on the N. 
by the Oxus river, on the N.W. and W. by Russia and the Hari 
Rud river, and on the S. by the Hindu Kush, the Koh-i-Baba 



and the northern watershed of the Hari Rud basin. Its northern 
frontier was decided by the Anglo-Russian agreement of 1873, 
and delimited by the Russo-Afghan boundary commission of 
1885, which gave rise to the Panjdeh incident. The whole 
territory, from the junction of the Kokcha river with the Oxus 
on the north-east to the province of Herat on the south-west, is 
some 500 m. in length, with an average width from the Russian 
frontier to the Hindu Kush of 114 m. It thus comprises about 
57,000 sq. m. or roughly two-ninths of the kingdom of Afghan- 
istan. Except in the river valleys it is a poor territory, rough 
and mountainous towards the south, but subsiding into undulat- 
ing wastes and pasture-lands towards the Turkman desert, and 
the Oxus riverain which is highly cultivated. The population, 
which is mostly agricultural, settled in and around its towns 
and villages, is estimated at 750,000. The province includes 
the khanates of Kunduz, Tashkurgan, Balkh with Akcha; the 
western khanates of Saripul, Shibarghan, Andkhui and Maimana, 
sometimes classed together as the Chahar Villayet, or " Four 
Domains"; and such parts of the Hazara tribes as lie north of 
the Hindu Kush and its prolongation. The principal town is 
Mazar-i-Sharif, .which in modern times has supplanted the 
ancient city of Balkh; and TakKtapul, near Mazar, is the chief 
Afghan cantonment north of the Hindu Kush. 

Ethnically and historically Afghan Turkestan is more con- 
nected with Bokhara than with Kabul, of which government 
it has been a dependency only since the time of Dost Mahommed. 
The bulk of the people of the cities are of Persian and Uzbeg 
stock, but interspersed with them are Mongol Hazaras and 
Hindus with Turkoman tribes in the Oxus plains. Over these 
races the Afghans rule as conquerors and there is no bond of 
racial unity between them. Ancient Balkh or Bactriana was 
a province of the Achaemenian empire, and probably was 
occupied in great measure by a race of Iranian blood. About 
250 B.C. Diodotus (Theodotus), governor of Bactria under the 
Seleucidae, declared his independence, and commenced the 
history of the Greco-Bactrian dynasties, which succumbed to 
Parthian and nomadic movements about 126 B.C. After this 
came a Buddhist era which has left its traces in the gigantic 
sculptures at Bamian and the rock-cut topes of Haibak. The 
district was devastated by Jenghiz Khan, and has never since 
fully recovered its prosperity. For about a century it belonged 
to the Delhi empire, and then fell into Uzbeg hands. In the 
18th century it formed part of the dominion of Ahmad Khan 
Durani, and so remained under his son Timur. But under the 
fratricidal wars of Timur's sons the separate khanates fell back 
under the independent rule of various Uzbeg chiefs. At the 
beginning of the 19th century they belonged to Bokhara; but 
under the great amir Dost Mahommed the Afghans recovered 
Balkh and Tashkurgan in 1850, Akcha and the four western 
khanates in 1855, and Kunduz in 1859. The sovereignty over 
Andkhui, Shibarghan, Saripul and Maimana was in dispute 
between Bokhara and Kabul until settled by the Anglo-Russian 
agreement of 1873 in favour of the Afghan claim. Under the 
strong rule of Abdur Rahman these outlying territories were 
closely welded to Kabul; but after the accession of Habibullah 
the bonds once more relaxed. (T. H. H.*) 

AFIUM-KARA-HISSAR {afium, opium), the popular name of 
Kara-hissar Sahib, a city of Asiatic Turkey, in the vilayet of 
Brusa, nearly 200 m. E. of Smyrna, and 50 m. S.S.E. of Kutaiah. 
Pop. 18,000 (Moslems, 13,000; Christians, 5000). Called 
Nicopolis by Leo III. after his victory over the Arabs in 740, 
its name was changed by the Seljuk Turks to Kara-hissar. It 
stands partly on level ground, partly on a declivity, and above 
it rises a precipitous trachytic rock (400 ft.) on the summit of 
which are the ruins of an ancient castle. From its situation 
on the route of the caravans between Smyrna and western Asia 
on the one hand, and Armenia, Georgia, &c, on the other, the 
city became a place of extensive trade, and its bazaars are well 
stocked with the merchandise of both Europe and the East. 
Opium in large quantities is produced in its vicinity and forms 
the staple article of its commerce ; and there are, besides, 
manufactures of black felts, carpets, arms and saddlery. Afium 



320 



A FORTIORI— AFRICA 



contains several mosques (one of them a very handsome building), 
and is the seat of an Armenian bishop. The town is connected 
by railway with Smyrna, Konia, Angora and Constantinople. 
See V. Cuinet, Turquie d'Asie (Paris, 1894), vol. iv. 

A FORTIORI (Lat. " from a stronger [reason] "), a term used 
of an argument which justifies a statement not itself specifically 
demonstrated by reference to a proved conclusion which includes 
it; thus, if A is proved less than B, and is known to be greater 
than C, it follows a fortiori that C is less than B without further 
proof. The argument is frequently based merely on a comparison 
of probabilities (cf. Matt. vi. 30), when it constitutes an appeal 
to common sense. 

AFRANIUS, LUCIUS, Roman general, lived in the times of 
the Sertorian (70-72), third Mithradatic (74-61) and Civil Wars. 
Of humble origin (Cic. ad Aft. i. 16. 20), from his early years 
he was a devoted adherent of Pbmpey. In 60, chiefly by 
Pompey's support, he was raised to the consulship, but in per- 
forming the duties of that office he showed an utter incapacity 
to manage civil affairs. In the following year, while governor 
of Cisalpine Gaul, he obtained the honour of a triumph, and on 
the allotment of Spain to Pompey (55), Afranius and Marcus 
Petreius were sent to take charge of the government. On the 
rupture between Caesar and Pompey they were . compelled, 
after a short campaign in which they were at first successful, 
to surrender to Caesar at Ilerda (49), and were dismissed on 
promising riot to serve again in the war. Afranius, regardless 
of his promise, joined Pompey at Dyrrhachium, and at the 
battle of Pharsalus (48) had charge of Pompey's camp. On the 
defeat of Pompey, Afranius, despairing of pardon from Caesar, 
went to Africa, and was present at the disastrous battle of 
Thapsus (46). Escaping from the field with a strong body of 
cavalry, he was afterwards taken prisoner, along with Faustus 
Sulla, by the troops of Sittius, and handed over to Caesar, whose 
veterans rose in tumult and put them to death. 

See Hirtius, Bell. Afric. 95; Plutarch, Pompey; Dio Cassius 
xxxvii., xli.-xliii.; Caesar, B.C. i. 37-87; Appian, B.C. ii. ; for the 
history of the period, articles on Caesar and Pompey. 

AFRANIUS, LUCIUS, Roman comic poet, flourished about 
94 B.C. His comedies chiefly dealt with everyday subjects from 
Roman middle-class life, and he himself tells us that he borrowed 
freely from Menander and others. His style was vigorous and 
correct; his moral tone that of the period. 

Horace, Epp. ii. 1. 57; Cicero, Brutus, 45, de Fin. i. 3; Quintilian 
x. 1. 100; fragments, about 400 lines, in Ribbeck, Scaenicae 
Romanorum Poesis Fragmenta, ii. (1898). 

AFRICA, the name of a continent representing the largest of 
the three great southward projections from the main mass of 
the earth's surface. It includes within its remarkably regular 
outline an area, according to the most recent computations, of 
11,262,000 sq. m., excluding the islands. 1 Separated from 
Europe by the Mediterranean Sea, it is joined to Asia at its N.E. 
extremity by the Isthmus of Suez, 80 m. wide. From the most 
northerly point, Ras ben Sakka, a little west of Cape Blanc, 
in 37 21' N., to the most southerly point, Cape Agulhas, 
34° S 1 ' I S" S., is a distance approximately of 5000 m.; from 
Cape Verde, 17 33' 22" W., the westernmost point, to Ras 
Hafun, 51 27' 52" E., the most easterly projection, is a dis- 
tance (also approximately) of 4600 m. The length of coast-line is 
16,100 m. and the absence of deep indentations of the shore is 
shown by the fact that Europe, which covers only 3,760,000 
sq. m., has a coast-line of 19,800 m. 

I. Physical Geography 

The main structural lines of the continent show both the 
east-to-west direction characteristic, at least in the eastern 
hemisphere, of the more northern parts of the world, and the 
north-to-south direction seen in the southern peninsulas. Africa 
is thus composed of two segments at right angles, the northern 
running from east to west, the southern from north to south, 
the subordinate lines corresponding in the main to these two 
directions. 

Main Orographical Features. — The mean elevation of the con- 
1 With the islands, 11,498,000 sq. m. 



tinent approximates closely to 2000 ft., which is roughly the 
elevation of both North and South America, but is considerably 
less than that of Asia (31 17 ft.). In contrast with the other 
continents it is marked by the comparatively small area both of 
very high and of very low ground, lands under 600 ft. occupying 
an unusually small. part of the surface; while not only are the 
highest elevations inferior to those of Asia and South America, 
but the area of land over 10,000 ft. is also quite insignificant, 
being represented almost entirely by individual peaks and 
mountain ranges. Moderately elevated tablelands are thus the 
characteristic feature of the continent, though the surface of 
these is broken by higher peaks and ridges. (So prevalent are 
these isolated peaks and ridges that a special term [Inselberg- 
landschafl] has been adopted in Germany to describe this kind 
of country, which is thought to be in great part the result of 
wind action.) As a general rule, the higher tablelands lie to 
the east and south, while a progressive diminution in altitude 
towards the west and north is observable. Apart from the low- 
lands and the Atlas range, the continent may be divided into 
two regions of higher and lower plateaus, the dividing line 
(somewhat concave to the north-west) running from the middle 
of the Red Sea to about 6° S. on the west coast. We thus obtain 
the following four main divisions of the continent: — (1) The 
coast plains— often fringed seawards by mangrove swamps — 
never stretching far from the coast, except on the lower courses 
of streams. Recent alluvial flats are found chiefly in the delta 
of the more important rivers. Elsewhere the coast lowlands 
merely form the lowest steps of the system of terraces which 
constitutes the ascent to the inner plateaus. (2) The Atlas 
range, which, orographically, is distinct from the rest of the 
continent, being unconnected with any other area of high ground, 
and separated from the rest of the continent on the south by a 
depressed and desert area (the Sahara) , in places below sea-level. 
(3) The high southern and eastern plateaus, rarely falling below 
2000 ft., and having a mean elevation of about 3500 ft. (4) The 
north and west African plains, bordered and traversed by bands 
of higher ground, but generally below 2000 ft. This division 
includes the great desert of the Sahara. 

The third arid fourth divisions may be again subdivided. 
Thus the high plateaus include: — (a) The South African plateau 
as far as about 12 S., bounded east, west and south by bands 
of high ground which fall steeply to the coasts. On this account 
South Africa has a general resemblance to an inverted saucer. 
Due south the plateau rim is formed by three parallel steps with 
level ground between them. The largest of these level areas, 
the Great Karroo, is a dry, barren region, and a large tract of 
the plateau proper is of a still more arid character and is known 
as the Kalahari Desert. The South African plateau is connected 
towards the north-east with (b) the East African plateau, with 
probably a slightly greater average elevation, and marked by 
some distinct features. It is formed by a widening out of the 
eastern axis of high ground, which becomes subdivided into 
a number of zones running north and south and consisting in 
turn of ranges, tablelands and depressions. The most striking 
feature is the existence of two great lines of depression, due 
largely to the subsidence of whole segments of the earth's crust, 
the lowest parts of which are occupied by vast lakes Towards 
the south the two lines converge and give place to one great 
valley (occupied by Lake Nyasa), the southern part of which 
is less distinctly due to rifting and subsidence than the rest of 
the system. Farther north the western depression, sometimes 
known as the Central African trough or Albertine rift-valley, 
is occupied for more than half its length by water, forming the 
four lakes of Tanganyika, Kivu, Albert Edward and Albert, 
the first-named over 400 m. long and the longest freshwater 
lake in the world. Associated with these great valleys are a 
number of volcanic peaks, the greatest of which occur on a 
meridional line east of the eastern trough. The eastern 
depression, known as the East African trough or rift-valley, 
contains much smaller lakes, many of them brackish and without 
outlet, the only one comparable to those of the western trough 
being Lake Rudolf or Basso Norok. At no great distance east 



GEOGRAPHY] 



AFRICA 



321 



of this rift-valley are Kilimanjaro — with its two peaks Kibo 
and Mawenzi, the former 19,321 ft, and the culminating point 
of the whole continent — and Kenya (17,007 ft.). Hardly less 
important is the Ruwenzori range (over 16,600 ft.), which lies 
east of the western trough. Other volcanic peaks rise from the 
floor of the valleys, some of the Kirunga (Mfumbiro) group, 
north of Lake Kivu, being still partially active, (c) The third 
division of the higher region of Africa is formed by the Abys- 
sinian highlands, a rugged mass of mountains forming the 
largest continuous area of its altitude in the whole continent, 
little of its surface falling below 5°°° ft, while the summits 
reach heights of 15,000 to 16,000 ft This block of country 
lies just west of the line of the great East African trough, the 
northern continuation of which passes along its eastern escarp- 
ment as it runs up to join the Red Sea. There is, however, in 
the centre a circular basin occupied by Lake Tsana. 

Both in the east and west of the continent the bordering 
highlands are continued as strips of plateau parallel to the coast, 
the Abyssinian mountains being continued northwards along 
the Red Sea coast by a series of ridges reaching in places a height 
of 7000 ft. In the west the zone of high land is broader but 
somewhat lower. The most mountainous districts lie inland 
from the head of the Gulf of Guinea (Adamawa, &c), where 
heights of 6000 to 8000 ft. are reached. Exactly at the head of 
the gulf the great peak of the Cameroon, on a line of volcanic 
action continued by the islands to the south-west, has a height 
of 13,370 ft, while Clarence Peak, in Fernando Po, the first 
of the line of islands, rises to over 9000. Towards the extreme 
west the Futa Jallon highlands form an important diverging 
point of rivers, but beyond this, as far as the Atlas chain, the 
elevated rim of the continent is almost wanting. 

The area between the east and west coast highlands, which 
north of 17 N. is mainly desert, is divided into separate basins 
by other bands of high ground, one of which runs nearly centrally 
through North Africa in a line corresponding roughly with the 
curved axis of the continent as a whole. The best marked of 
the basins so formed (the Congo basin) occupies a circular area 
bisected by the equator, once probably the site of an inland sea. 
The arid region, the Sahara — the largest desert in the world, 
covering 3,500,000 sq. m. — extends from the Atlantic to the 
Red Sea. Though generally of slight elevation it contains 
mountain ranges with peaks rising to 8000 ft. Bordered N.W. 
by the Atlas range, to the N.E. a rocky plateau separates it 
from the Mediterranean; this plateau gives place at the extreme 
east to the delta of the Nile. That river (see below) pierces the 
desert without modifying its character. The Atlas range, the 
sorth-westerly part of the continent, between its seaward and 
landward heights encloses elevated steppes in places 100 m. 
broad. From the inner slopes of the plateau numerous wadis 
take a direction towards the Sahara. The greater part of that 
now desert region is, indeed, furrowed by old water-channels. 

The following table gives the approximate altitudes of the 
chief mountains and lakes of the continent: — 

Mountains. Ft. Lakes. Ft. 

Rungwe (Nyasa) . 10,400 Chad .... 850 1 
Drakensberg . . 11,700' Leopold II . . 1100 

Lereko or Sattima 13,214" Rudolf . . . 1250 
(Aberdare Range) Nyasa . . . 1645" 

Cameroon . . 13,370 Albert Nyanza . 2028' 

Elgon . . . 14,152 s Tanganyika . . 2624" 
Karissimbi (Mfum- Ngami . . . 2950 

biro) . . . 14,683" Mweru . . . 3000 
Meru . . . 14,955" Albert Edward . 3004" 

Tagharat (Atlas) . 15,000' Bangweulu. . . 3700 
Simen Mountains, 15,160' Victoria Nyanza . 3720" 
Abyssinia Abai . . . 4200 

Ruwenzori . . 16,619" Kivu . . . 4829" 

Kenya . . . 17,007" Tsana . . . 5690 

Kilimanjaro . . 19,321" Naivasha . . 6135" 

The Hydrographic Systems. — From the outer margin of the 
African plateaus a large number of streams run to the sea with 
comparatively short courses, while the larger rivers flow for long 

1 Estimated. 

" See the calculations of Capt. T. T. Behrens, Geog. Journal, vol. 
lexix. (1907). 
I. U 



distances on the interior highlands before breaking through the 
outer ranges. The main drainage of the continent is to the north 
and west, or towards the basin of the Atlantic Ocean. The high 
lake plateau of East Africa contains the head-waters of the Nile 
and Congo: the former the longest, the latter the largest river 
of the continent. The upper Nile receives its chief supplies 
from the mountainous region adjoining the Central African 
trough in the neighbourhood of the equator. Thence streams 
pour east to the Victoria Nyanza, the largest African lake 
(covering over 26,000 sq. m.), and west and north to the Albert 
Edward and Albert Nyanzas, to the latter of which the effluents 
of the other two lakes add their waters. Issuing from it the Nile 
flows north, and between 7° and io° N. traverses a vast marshy 
level during which its course is liable to blocking by floating 
vegetation. After receiving the Bahr-el-Ghazal from the west 
and the Sobat, Blue Nile and Atbara from the Abyssinian 
highlands (the chief gathering ground of the flood- water), it 
crosses the great desert and enters the Mediterranean by a 
vast delta. The most remote head-stream of the Congo is the 
Chambezi, which flows south-west into the marshy Lake Bang- 
weulu. From this lake issues the Congo, known in its upper 
course by various names. Flowing first south, it afterwards 
turns north through Lake Mweru and descends to the forest-clad 
basin of west equatorial Africa. Traversing this in a majestic 
northward curve and receiving vast supplies of water from many 
great tributaries, it finally turns south-west and cuts a way to 
the Atlantic Ocean through the western highlands. North of 
the Congo basin and separated from it by a broad undulation 
of the surface is the basin of Lake Chad — a flat-shored, shallow 
lake filled principally by the Shari coming from the south-east. 
West of this is the basin of the Niger, the third river of Africa, 
which, though flowing to the Atlantic, has its principal source 
in the far west, and reverses the direction of flow exhibited by 
the Nile and Congo. An important branch, however — the 
Benue — comes from the south-east. These four river-basins 
occupy the greater part of the lower plateaus of North and 
West Africa, the remainder consisting of arid regions watered 
only by intermittent streams which do not reach the sea. Of 
the remaining rivers of the Atlantic basin the Orange, in the 
extreme south, brings the drainage from the Drakensberg on 
the opposite side of the continent, while the Kunene, Kwanza, 
Ogowe and Sanaga drain the west coast highlands of the 
southern limb; the Volta, Komoe, Bandama, Gambia and 
Senegal the highlands of the western limb. North of the Senegal 
for over 1000 m. of coast the arid region reaches to the Atlantic. 
Farther north are the streams, with comparatively short courses, 
which reach the Atlantic and Mediterranean from the Atlas 
mountains. 

Of the rivers flowing to the Indian Ocean the only one draining 
any large part of the interior plateaus is the Zambezi, whose 
western branches rise in the west coast highlands. The main 
stream has its rise in n° 21' 3" S. 24 22' E. at an elevation of 
5000 ft. It flows west and south for a considerable distance 
before turning to the east. All the largest tributaries, including 
the Shire, the outflow of Lake Nyasa, flow down the southern 
slopes of the band of high ground which stretches across the 
continent in io° to 12° S. In the south-west the Zambezi 
system interlaces with that of the Taukhe (or Tioghe), from 
which it at times receives surplus water. The rest of the water 
of the Taukhe, known in its middle course as the Okavango, is 
lost in a system of swamps and saltpans which formerly centred 
in Lake Ngami, now dried up. Farther south the Limpopo 
drains a portion of the interior plateau but breaks through the 
bounding highlands on the side of the continent nearest its 
source. The Rovuma, Rufiji, Tana, Juba and Webi Shebeli 
principally drain the outer slopes of the East African highlands, 
the last named losing itself in the sands in close proximity to 
the sea. Another large stream, the Hawash, rising in the 
Abyssinian mountains, is lost in a saline depression near the 
Gulf of Aden. Lastly, between the basins of the Atlantic and 
Indian Oceans there is an area of inland drainage along the 
centre of the East African plateau, directed chiefly into the 

11 



322 



AFRICA 



[GEOGRAPHY 



lakes in the great rift-valley. The largest river is the Omo, 
which, fed by the rains of the Abyssinian highlands, carries 
down a large body of water into Lake Rudolf. The rivers of 
Africa are generally obstructed either by bars at their mouths 
or by cataracts at no great distance up-stream. But when 
these obstacles have been overcome the rivers and lakes afford a 
network of navigable waters of vast extent. 

The calculation of the areas of African drainage systems, 
made by Dr A. Bludau (Petermanns Mitteilungen, 43, 1897, 
pp. 184-186) gives the following general results: — 

Basin of the Atlantic .... 4,070,000 sq. m. 
,, ,, Mediterranean . . . 1,680,000 ,, 
,, ,, _ Indian Ocean . . . 2,086,000 „ 

Inland drainage area 3,452,000 „ 

The areas of individual river-basins are: — 

Congo (length over 3000 m.) . . 1,425,000 sq. m. 
Nile ( ,, fully 4000 m.) . . I,o82,ooo l „ 

Niger ( ,, about 2600 m.) . . 808, ooo 2 „ 

Zambezi ( „ „ 2000 m.) , . 513,500 „ 
Lake Chad . . ..... 394,000 „ 

Orange (length about 1300 m.) . . 370,500 s „ 
,, (actual drainage area) . . 172,500 ,, 

The area of the Congo basin is greater than that of any other 
river except the Amazon, while the African inland drainage 
area is greater than that of any continent but Asia, in which the 
corresponding area is 4,900,000 sq. m. 

The principal African lakes have been mentioned in the 
description of the East African plateau, but some of the pheno- 
mena connected with them may be spoken of more particularly 
here. As a rule the lakes which occupy portions of the great 
rift-valleys have steep sides and are very deep. This is the case 
with the two largest of the type, Tanganyika and Nyasa, the 
latter of which has depths of 430 fathoms. Others, however, 
are shallow, and hardly reach the steep sides of the valleys in 
the dry season. Such are Lake Rukwa, in a subsidiary depression 
north of Nyasa, and Eiassi and Manyara in the system of the 
eastern rift-valley. Lakes of the broad type are of moderate 
depth, the deepest sounding in Victoria Nyanza being under 
50 fathoms. Apart from the seasonal variations of level, most 
of the lakes show periodic fluctuations, while a progressive 
desiccation of the whole region is said to be traceable, tending to 
the ultimate disappearance of the lakes. Such a drying up has 
been in progress during long geologic ages, but doubt exists as 
to its practical importance at the present time. The periodic 
fluctuations in the level of Lake Tanganyika are such that its 
outflow is intermittent. Besides the East African lakes the 
principal are: — Lake Chad, in the northern area of inland 
drainage; Bangweulu and Mweru, traversed by the head-stream 
of the Congo; and Leopold II. and Ntomba (Mantumba), 
within the great bend of that river. All, except possibly Mweru, 
are more or less shallow, and Chad appears to by drying up. The 
altitudes of the African lakes have already been stated. 

Divergent opinions have been held as to the mode of origin 
of the East African lakes, especially Tanganyika, which some 
geologists have considered to represent an old arm of the sea, 
dating from a time when the whole central Congo basin was 
under water; others holding that the lake water has accumulated 
in a depression caused by subsidence. The former view is based 
on the existence in the lake of organisms of a decidedly marine 
type. They include a jelly-fish, molluscs, prawns, crabs, &c, 
and were at first considered to form an isolated group found 
in no other of the African lakes; but this supposition has been 
proved to be erroneous. 

Islands. — With one exception — Madagascar — the African 
islands are small. Madagascar, with an area of 229,820 sq. m., 
is, after New Guinea and Borneo, the largest island of the world. 
It lies off the S.E, coast of the continent, from which it is 
separated by the deep Mozambique channel, 250 m. wide at its 
narrowest point. Madagascar in its general structure, as in flora 
and fauna, forms a connecting link between Africa and southern 
Asia. East of Madagascar are the small islands of Mauritius 
and Reunion. Sokotra lies E.N.E. of Cape Guardafui. Off the 

1 The estimate of Capt. H. G. Lyons in 1905 was 1,107,227 sq. m. 

2 Including waterless tracts naturally belonging to the river-basin. 



north-west coast are the Canary and Cape Verde archipelagoes, 
which, like some small islands in the Gulf of Guinea, are of 
volcanic origin. 

Climate and Health. — Lying almost entirely within the tropics, 
and equally to north and south of the equator, Africa does not 
show excessive variations of temperature. Great heat is ex- 
perienced in the lower plains and desert regions of North Africa, 
removed by the great width of the continent from the influence 
of the ocean, and here, too, the contrast between day and night, 
and between summer and winter, is greatest. (The rarity of the 
air and the great radiation during the night cause the temperature 
in the Sahara to fall occasionally to freezing point.) Farther 
south, the heat is to some extent modified by the moisture 
brought from the ocean, and by the greater elevation of a large 
part of the surface, especially in East Africa, where the range of 
temperature is wider than in the Congo basin or on the Guinea 
coast. In the extreme north and south the climate is a warm 
temperate one, the northern countries being on the whole hotter 
and drier than those in the southern zone; the south of the 
continent being narrower than the north, the influence of the 
surrounding ocean is more felt. The most important climatic 
differences are due to variations in the amount of rainfall. The 
wide heated plains of the Sahara, and in a lesser degree the 
corresponding zone of the Kalahari in the south, have an ex- 
ceedingly scanty rainfall, the winds which blow over them from 
the ocean losing part of their moisture as they pass over the 
outer highlands, and becoming constantly drier owing to the 
heating effects of the burning soil of the interior; while the 
scarcity of mountain ranges in the more central parts likewise 
tends to prevent condensation. In the inter-tropical zone of 
summer precipitation, the rainfall is greatest when the sun is 
vertical or soon after. It is therefore greatest of all near the 
equator, where the sun is twice vertical, and less in the direction 
of both tropics. The rainfall zones are, however, somewhat 
deflected from a due west-to-east direction, the drier northern 
conditions extending southwards along the east coast, and 
those of the south northwards along the west. Within the 
equatorial zone certain areas, especially on the shores of the 
Gulf of Guinea and in the upper Nile basin, have an intensified 
rainfall, but this rarely approaches that of the rainiest regions oi 
the world. The rainiest district in all Africa is a strip of coast- 
land west of Mount Cameroon, where there is a mean annual 
rainfall of about 390 in. as compared with a mean of 458 in. 
at Cherrapunji, in Assam. The two distinct rainy seasons of 
the equatorial zone, where the sun is vertical at half-yearly 
intervals, become gradually merged into one in the direction 
of the tropics, where the sun is overhead but once. Snow falls 
on all the higher mountain ranges, and on the highest the climate 
is thoroughly Alpine. The countries bordering the Sahara are 
much exposed to a very dry wind, full of fine particles of sand, 
blowing from the desert towards the sea. Known in Egypt as 
the khamsin, on the Mediterranean as the sirocco, it is called 
on the Guinea coast the harmattan. This wind is not invariably 
hot; its great dryness causes so much evaporation that cold 
is not infrequently the result. Similar dry winds blow from 
the Kalahari in the south. On the eastern coast the monsoons 
of the Indian Ocean are regularly felt, and on the south-east 
hurricanes are occasionally experienced. 

While the climate of the north and south, especially the south, 
is eminently healthy, and even the intensely heated Sahara is 
salubrious by reason of its dryness, the tropical zone as a whole 
is, for European races, the most unhealthy portion of the world. 
This is especially the case in the lower and moister regions, such 
as the west coast, where malarial fever is very prevalent and 
deadly; the most unfavourable factors being humidity with 
absence of climatic variation (daily or seasonal). The higher 
plateaus, where not only is the average temperature lower, -but 
such variations are more extensive, are more healthy; and in 
certain localities (e.g. Abyssinia and parts of British East Africa) 
Europeans find the climate suitable for permanent residence. 
On tablelands over 6500 ft. above the sea, frost is not uncommon 
at night, even in places directly under the equator. The 



FLORA AND FAUNA] 



AFRICA 



323 



acclimatization of white men in tropical Africa generally is 
dependent largely on the successful treatment of tropical diseases. 
Districts which had been notoriously deadly to Europeans 
were rendered comparatively healthy after the discovery, in 
1899, of the species of mosquito which propagates malarial 
fever, and the measures thereafter taken for its destruction and 
the filling up of swamps. The rate of mortality among the 
natives from tropical diseases is also high, one of the most fatal 
being that known as sleeping sickness. (The ravages of this 
disease, which also attacks Europeans, reached alarming pro- 
portions between 1893 and 1907, and in the last-named year 
an international conference was held in London to consider 
measures to combat it.) When removed to colder regions natives 
of the equatorial districts suffer greatly from chest complaints. 
Smallpox also makes great ravages among the negro population. 

Flora. — The vegetation of Africa follows very closely the dis- 
tribution of heat and moisture. The northern and southern 
temperate zones have a flora distinct from that of the continent 
generally, which is tropical. In the countries bordering the Medi- 
terranean are groves of oranges and olive 1;rees, evergreen oaks, 
cork trees and pines, intermixed with cypresses, myrtles, arbutus 
and fragrant tree-heaths. South of the Atlas range the conditions 
alter. The zones of minimum rainfall have a very scanty flora, 
consisting of plants adapted to resist the great dryness. Charac- 
teristic of the Sahara is the date-palm, which flourishes where 
other vegetation can scarcely maintain existence, while in the 
semi-desert regions the acacia (whence is obtained gum-arabic) 
is abundant. The more humid regions have a richer vegetation 
— dense forest where the rainfall is greatest and variations of 
temperature least, conditions found chiefly on the tropical coasts, 
and in the west African equatorial basin with its extension 
towards the upper Nile; and savanna interspersed with trees on 
the greater part of the plateaus, passing as the desert regions are 
approached into a scrub vegetation consisting of thorny acacias, 
&c. Forests also occur on the humid slopes of mountain ranges 
up to a certain elevation. In the coast regions the typical tree 
is the mangrove, which flourishes wherever the soil is of a swamp 
character. The dense forests of West Africa contain, in addition 
to a great variety of dicotyledonous trees, two palms, the Elaeis 
guincensis (oil-palm) and Raphia vinifera (bamboo-pa'lm) , not 
found, generally speaking, in the savanna regions. The bombax 
or silk-cotton tree attains gigantic proportions in the forests, 
which are the home of the indiarubber-producing plants and of 
many valuable kinds of timber trees, such as odum (Chlorophora 
excclsa) , ebony, mahogany (Khaya senegalensis) , African teak or 
oak {Oldfieldia africana) and camwood (Baphia nitida). The 
climbing plants in the tropical forests are exceedingly luxuriant 
and the undergrowth or " bush " is extremely dense. In the 
savannas the most characteristic trees are the monkey bread tree 
or baobab (Adansonia digitata), doom palm (Hyphaene) and 
euphorbias. The coffee plant grows wild in such widely 
separated places as Liberia and southern Abyssinia. The higher 
mountains have a special flora showing close agreement over 
wide intervals of space, as well as affinities with the mountain 
flora of the eastern Mediterranean, the Himalayas and Indo- 
China (cf. A. Engler, Uber die Hochgebirgsflora des tropischen 
Ajrika, 1892). 

In the swamp regions of north-east Africa the papyrus and 
associated plants, including the soft-wooded ambach, flourish in 
immense quantities — and little else is found in the way of 
vegetation. South Africa is largely destitute of forest save in 
the lower valleys and coast regions. Tropical flora disappears, 
and in the semi-desert plains the fleshy, leafless, contorted 
species of kapsias, mesembryanthemums, aloes and other succu- 
lent plants make their appearance. There are, too, valuable 
timber trees, such as the yellow pine (Podocarpus elongatus), 
stink wood (Ocotea), sneeze wood or Cape ebony (Pteroxylon utile) 
and ironwood. Extensive miniature woods of heaths are found 
in almost endless variety and covered throughout the greater 
part of the year with innumerable blossoms in which red is very 
prevalent. Of the grasses of Africa alfa is very abundant in the 
plateaus of the Atlas range. 



Fauna. — The fauna again shows the effect of the character- 
istics of the vegetation. The open savannas are the home of 
large ungulates, especially antelopes, the giraffe (peculiar to 
Africa), zebra, buffalo, wild ass and four species of rhinoceros; 
and of carnivores, such as the lion, leopard, hyaena, &c. The 
okapi (a genus restricted to Africa) is found only in the dense 
forests of the Congo basin. Bears are confined to the Atlas 
region, wolves and foxes to North Africa. The elephant (though 
its range has become restricted through the attacks of hunters) 
is found both in the savannas and forest regions, the 'latter being 
otherwise poor in large game, though the special habitat of the 
chimpanzee and gorilla. Baboons and mandrills, with few excep- 
tions, are peculiar to Africa. The single-humped camel — as a 
domestic animal — is especially characteristic of the northern 
deserts and steppes. 

The rivers in the tropical zone abound with hippopotami and 
crocodiles, the former entirely confined to Africa. The vast 
herds of game, formerly so characteristic of many parts of Africa, 
have much diminished with the increase of intercourse with the 
interior. Game reserves have, however, been established in 
South Africa, British Central Africa, British East Africa, Somali- 
land, &c, while measures for the protection of wild animals 
were laid down in an international convention signed in May 
1900. 

The ornithology of northern Africa presents a close resemblance 
to that of southern Europe, scarcely a species being found which 
does not also occur in the other countries bordering the Mediter- 
ranean. Among the birds most characteristic of Africa are the 
ostrich and the secretary-bird. The ostrich is widely dispersed, 
but is found chiefly in the desert and steppe regions. The 
secretary-bird is common in the south. The weaver birds and 
their allies, including the long-tailed whydahs, are abundant, as 
are, among game-birds, the francolin and guinea-fowl. Many of 
the smaller birds, such as the sun-birds, bee-eaters, the parrots 
and halcyons, as well as the larger plantain-eaters, are noted 
for the brilliance of their plumage. Of reptiles the lizard and 
chameleon are common, and there are a number of venomous 
serpents, though these are not so numerous as in other tropical 
countries. The scorpion is abundant. Of insects Africa has 
many thousand different kinds; of these the locust is the pro- 
verbial scourge of the continent, and the ravages of the termites 
or white ants are almost incredible. The spread of malaria by 
means of mosquitoes has already been mentioned. The tsetse fly, 
whose bite is fatal to all domestic animals, is common in many 
districts of South and East Africa. Fortunately it is found 
nowhere outside Africa. (E. He.; F. R. C.) 

II. Geology 

In shape and general geological structure Africa bears a close 
resemblance to India. Both possess a meridional extension with 
a broad east and west folded region in the north. In both a 
successive series of continental deposits, ranging from the Car- 
boniferous to the Rhaetic, rests on an older base of crystalline 
rocks. In the words of Professor Suess, " India and Africa are 
true plateau countries." 

Of the primitive axes of Africa few traces remain. Both on 
the east and west a broad zone of crystalline rocks extends parallel 
with the coast-line to form the margin of the elevated plateau of 
the interior. Occasionally the crystalline belt comes to the coast, 
but it is usually reached by two steps known as the coastal belt 
and foot-plateau. On the flanks of the primitive western axis 
certain ancient sedimentary strata are thrown into folds which 
were completed before the commencement of the mesozoic period. 
In the south, the later palaeozoic rocks are also thrown into acute 
folds by a movement acting from the south, and which ceased 
towards the close of the mesozoic period. In northern Africa the 
folded region of the Atlas belongs to the comparatively recent 
date of the Alpine system. None of these earth movements 
affected the interior, for here the. continental mesozoic deposits 
rest, undisturbed by folding, on the primary sedimentary and 
crystalline rocks. The crystalline massif, therefore, presents a 
solid block which has remained elevated since early palaeozoic 



324 



AFRICA 



[GEOLOGY 



times, and against which earth waves of several geological periods 
have broken. 

The formations older than the mesozoic are remarkably un- 
fossiliferous, so that the determination of their age is frequently 
a matter of speculation, and in the following table the European 
equivalents of the pre-Karroo formations in many regions must 
be regarded as subject to considerable revision. 

Rocks of Archean age cover wide areas in the interior, in 
West and East Africa and across the Sahara. Along the coastal 
margins they underlie the newer formations and appear in the 
deep valleys and kloofs wherever denudation has laid them bare. 
The prevailing types are granites, gneisses and schists. In the 
central regions the predominant strike of the foliae is north and 
south. The rocks, for convenience classed as pre-Cambrian, 
occur as several unconformable groups, chiefly developed in 
the south where alone their stratigraphy has been determined. 
They are unfossiliferous, and in the absence of undoubted 
Cambrian, Ordovician and Silurian strata in Africa they may be 
regarded as of older date than any of these formations. The 




Emery Walker so 



general occurrence of jasper-bearing rocks is of interest, as 
these are always present in the ancient pressure-altered sedi- 
mentary formations of America and Europe. Some unfossili- 
ferous conglomerates, sandstones and dolomites in South Africa 
and on the west coast are considered to belong to the Cambrian, 
Ordovician and Silurian formations, but merely from their 
occurrence beneath strata yielding Devonian fossils. In Cape 
Colony the Silurian age of the Table Mountain Sandstone is 
based on such evidence. 

The Devonian and Carboniferous formations are well repre- 
sented in the north and south and in northern Angola. 

Up to the close of the palaeozoic period the relative positions 
of the ancient land masses and oceans remain unsolved; but 
the absence of marine strata of early palaeozoic age from Central 
Africa points to there. being land in this direction. In late Car- 
boniferous times Africa and India were undoubtedly united to 
form a large continent, called by Suess Gondwana Land. In each 
country the same succession of the rocks is met with; over both 
the same specialized orders of reptiles roamedand were entombed. 

The interior of the African portion of Gondwana Land was 
occupied by several large lakes in which an immense thickness — 
amounting to over 18,000 ft. in South Africa — of sandstones 
and marls, forming the Karroo system, was laid down, This is 



par excellence the African formation, and covers immense areas 
in South Africa and the Congo basin, with detached portions in 
East Africa. During the whole of the time — Carboniferous to 
Rhaetic — that this great accumulation of freshwater beds was 
taking place, the interior of the continent must have been 
undergoing depression. The commencement of the period was 
marked by one of the most wonderful episodes in the geological 
history of Africa. Preserved in the formation known as the 
Dwyka Conglomerate, are evidences that at this time the 
greater portion of South Africa was undergoing extreme glacia- 
tion, while the same conditions appear to have prevailed in India 



Table of Formations 



Recent. 

Pleistocene. 

Pliocene. 
Miocene. 
Oligocene. 

Eocene. 

Cretaceous. 

rjurassic. 



Some volcanic islands ; 
rift- valley volcanoes. 



Trias. 



^Permian. 
Carboniferous. 

Devonian. 
Silurian. 
Ordovician. 
Cambrian. 

Pre-Cambrian. 
Archean. 



Sedimentary. 

Allu viu m ; travertine ; 
coral ; sand dunes ; con- 
tinental dunes. Gener- 
ally distributed. 

Ancient alluviums and 
gravels ; travertine. 
Generally distributed. 

N. Africa; Madagascar. 

N. Africa. 
N-. Africa. 



N. Africa, along east and 
west coasts ; Madagas- 
car. 

Extensively developed in 
N. Africa; along coast 
and foot-plateaus in east 
and west ; Madagascar. 

N. Africa; E. Africa; 

Madagascar ; Stormberg 

period (Rhaetic) in S. 

Africa. 
Beaufort Series in S." 

Africa ; Congo basin ; 

Central Africa; Algeria; 

Tunis. 
Ecca Series in S. Africa. 

N. Africa; Sabaki Shales 
in E. Africa; Dwyka 
and Witteberg Series in 
S. Africa. 

N. Africa; Angola; Bokke- 
veld Series in S. Africa. 

Table Mountain Sandstone" 
in S. Africa, Silurian(?). 
Doubtfully represented 
in N. Africa, French 
Congo, Angola, and by 
Vaal River and Water- 
berg Series in S. Africa., 

Quartzites, conglomerates, " 
phyllites, jasper-bearing 
rocks and schists. Gener- 
ally distributed. 

Gneisses and schists of the 
continental platform. 



Igneous. 



A long-continued suc- 
cession in the cen- 
tral and northern 
regions and among 
the island groups. 
Doubtfully repre- 
sented south of the 
Zambezi. 



Diamond pipes of S. 
Africa ; Kaptian 

fissure eruptions; 
Ashangi traps of 
Abyssinia. 

Chief volcanic period 
in S. Africa. 



Feebly, if anywhere 
developed. 



. Not recorded. 



Klipriversberg and 
Ventersdorp Series 
of the Transvaal (?). 



S. Africa and gener- 
ally. 

Igneous complex of 
sheared igneous 
rocks ; granites. 

and Australia. At the close of the Karroo period there was 
a remarkable manifestation of volcanic activity which again 
has its parallel in the Deccan traps of India. 

How far the Karroo formation extended beyond its present 
confines has not been determined. To the east it reached India. 
In the south all that can be said is that it extended to the south 
of Worcester in Cape Colony. The Crystal Mountains of Angola 
may represent its western boundary; while the absence of 
mesozoic strata beneath the Cretaceous rocks of the mid-Sahara 
indicates that the system of Karroo lakeland had here reached 
its most northerly extension. Towards the close of the Karroo 
period, possibly about the middle, .the southern rim of the great 
central depression became ridged up to form the folded regions 
of the Zwaarteberg, Cedarberg and Langeberg mountains in 
Cape Colony. This folded belt gives Africa its abrupt southern 



ETHNOLOGY] 



AFRICA 



325 



termination, and may be regarded as an embryonic indication of 
its present outline. The exact date of the maximum develop- 
ment of this folding is unknown, but it had done its work and 
some 10,000 ft. of strata had been removed before the com- 
mencement of the Cretaceous period. It appears to approximate 
in time to the similar earth movement and denudation at the 
close of the palaeozoic period in Europe. It was doubtless 
connected with the disruption of Gondwana Land, since it is 
known that this great alteration of geographical outline com- 
menced in Jurassic times. 

The breaking up of Gondwana Land is usually considered 
to have been caused by a series of blocks of country being let 
down by faulting with the consequent formation of the Indian 
Ocean. Other blocks, termed horsts, remained unmoved, the 
island of Madagascar affording a striking example. In the 
African portion Ruwenzori is regarded by some geologists to be 
a block mountain or horst. 

In Jurassic times the sea gained access to East Africa north 
of Mozambique, but does not appear to have reached far beyond 
the foot-plateau except in Abyssinia. 

The Cretaceous seas appear to have extended into the central 
Saharan regions, for fossils of this age have been discovered in 
the interior. On the west coast Cretaceous rocks extend con- 
tinuously from Mogador to Cape Blanco. From here they are 
absent up to the Gabun river, where they commence to form a 
narrow fringe as far as the Kunene river, though often overlain 
by recent deposits. They are again absent up to the Sunday river 
in Cape Colony, where Lower Cretaceous rocks (for long con- 
sidered to be of Oolitic age) of an inshore character are met 
with. Strata of Upper Cretaceous age occur in Pondoland and 
Natal, and are of exceptional interest since the fossils show 
an intermingling of Pacific types with other forms having Euro- 
pean affinities. In Mozambique and in German East Africa, 
Cretaceous rocks extend from the coast to a distance inland of 
over 100 m. 

Except in northern Africa, the Tertiary formations only occur 
in a few isolated patches on the east and west coasts. In northern 
Africa they are well developed and of much interest. They 
contain the well-known nummulitic limestone of Eocene age, 
which has been traced from Egypt across Asia to China. The 
Upper Eocene rocks of Egypt have also yielded primeval types 
of the Prohoscidea and other mammalia. Evidences for the 
greater extension of the Eocene seas than was formerly con- 
sidered to be the case have been discovered around Sokoto. 
During Miocene times Passarge considers that the region of the 
Zambezi underwent extreme desiccation. 

The effect of the Glacial epoch in Europe is shown in northern 
Africa by the moraines of the higher Atlas, and the wider exten- 
sion of the glaciers on Kilimanjaro, Kenya and Ruwenzori, and 
by the extensive accumulations of gravel over the Sahara. 

The earliest signs of igneous activity in Africa are to be 
found in the granites, intrusive into the older rocks of the Cape 
peninsula, into those of the Transvaal, and into the gneisses 
and schists of Central Africa. The Ventersdorp boulder beds 
of the Transvaal may be of early palaeozoic age; but as a whole 
the palaeozoic period in Africa was remarkably free from volcanic 
and igneous disturbances. The close of the Stormberg period 
(Rhaetic) was one of great volcanic activity in South Africa. 
Whilst the later Secondary and Tertiary formations were being 
laid down in North Africa and around the margins of the rest 
of the continent, Africa received its last great accumulation of 
strata and at the same time underwent a consecutive series of 
earth-movements. The additional strata consist of the immense 
quantities of volcanic material on the plateau of East Africa, 
the basalt flows of West Africa and possibly those of the Zambezi 
basin. The exact period of the commencement of volcanic 
activity is unknown. In Abyssinia the Ashangi traps are cer- 
tainly post-Oolitic. In East Africa the fissure eruptions are con- 
sidered to belong to the Cretaceous. These early eruptions were 
followed by those of Kenya, Mawenzi, Elgon, Chibcharagnani, 
and these by the eruptions of Kibo, Longonot, Suswa and 
the Kyulu Mountains. The last phase of vulcanicity took 



place along the great meridional rifts of East Africa, and though 
feebly manifested has not entirely passed away. In northern 
Africa a continuous sequence of volcanic events has taken place 
from Eocene times to latest Tertiary; but in South Africa it is 
doubtful if there have been any intrusions later then Cretaceous. 

During this long continuance of vulcanicity, earth-movements 
were in progress. In the north the chief movements gave rise 
to the system of latitudinal folding and faulting of the Moroccan 
and Algerian Atlas, the last stages being represented by the 
formation of the Algerian and Moroccan coast-outline and the 
sundering of Europe from Africa at the Straits of Gibraltar. 
Whilst northern Africa was being folded, the East African 
plateau was broken up by a series of longitudinal rifts extending 
from Nyasaland to Egypt. The depressed areas contain the 
long, narrow, precipitously walled lakes of East Africa. The 
Red Sea also occupies a meridional trough. 

Lastly there are the recent elevations of the northern coastal 
regions, the Barbary coast and along the east coast. (W. G.*) 

III. Ethnology 

In attempting a review of the races and tribes which inhabit 
Africa, their distribution, movements and culture, it is advisable 
that three points be borne in mind. The first of these is the 
comparative absence of natural barriers in the interior, owing to 
which intercommunication between tribes, the dissemination of 
culture and tribal migration have been considerably facilitated. 
Hence the student must be prepared to find that, for the most 
part, there are no sharp divisions to mark the extent of the 
various races composing the population, but that the number of 
what may be termed " transitional " peoples is unusually large. 
The second point is that Africa, with the exception of the lower 
Nile valley and what is known as Roman Africa (see Africa, 
Roman), is, so far as its native inhabitants are concerned, a 
continent practically without a history, and possessing no records 
from which such a history might be reconstructed. The early 
movements of tribes, the routes by which they reached their 
present abodes, and the origin of such forms of culture as may be 
distinguished in the general mass of customs, beliefs, &c, are 
largely matters of conjecture. The negro is essentially the child 
of the moment; and his memory, both tribal and individual, is 
very short. The third point is that many theories which have 
been formulated with respect to such matters are unsatisfactory 
owing to the small amount of information concerning many of 
the tribes in the interior. 

Excluding the Europeans who have found a home in various 
parts of Africa, and the Asiatics, Chinese and natives of India 
introduced by them (see section History below), the 
population of Africa consists of the following elements: African 
— the Bushman, the Negro, the Eastern Hamite, races. 
the Libyan and the Semite, from the intermingling 
of which in various proportions a vast number of " transi- 
tional " tribes has arisen. The Bushmen (q.v.), a race 
of short yellowish-brown nomad hunters, inhabited, in the 
earliest times of which there is historic knowledge, the land 
adjoining the southern and eastern borders of the Kalahari 
desert, into which they were gradually being forced by the 
encroachment of the Hottentots and Bantu tribes. But signs of 
their former presence are not wanting as far north as Lake 
Tanganyika, and even, it is rumoured, still farther north. With 
them may be classed provisionally the Hottentots, a pastoral 
people of medium stature and yellowish-brown complexion, who 
in early times shared with the Bushmen the whole of what is now 
Cape Colony. Though the racial affinities of the Hottentots have 
been disputed, the most satisfactory view on the whole is that 
they represent a blend of Bushman, Negroid and Hamitic 
elements. Practically the rest of Africa, from the southern fringe 
of the Sahara and the upper valley of the Nile to the Cape, with 
the exception of Abyssinia and Galla and Somali-lands, is peopled 
by Negroes and the " transitional " tribes to which their ad- 
mixture with Libyans on the north, and Semites (Arabs) and 
Hamites on the north-east and east, has given rise. A slight 
qualification of the last statement is necessary, in so far as, among 



326 



AFRICA 



[ETHNOLOGY 



the Fula in the western Sudan, and the Ba-Hima, &c, of the 
Victoria Nyanza, Libyan and Hamitic elements are respectively 
stronger than the Negroid. Of the tracts excepted, Abyssinia is 
inhabited mainly by Semito-Hamites (though a fairly strong 
negroid element can be found), and Somali and Galla-lands by 
Hamites. North of the Sahara in Algeria and Morocco are the 
Libyans (Berbers, q.v.), a distinctively white people, who have in 
certain respects (e.g. religion) fallen under Arab influence. In 
the north-east the brown-skinned Hamite and the Semite mingle 
in varied proportions. The Negroid peoples, which inhabit the 
vast tracts of forest and savanna between the areas held by 
Bushmen to the south and the Hamites, Semites and Libyans to 
the north, fall into two groups divided by a line running from the 
Cameroon (Rio del Rey) crossing the Ubangi river below the 
bend and passing between the Ituri and the Semliki rivers, to 
Lake Albert and thence with a slight southerly trend to the coast. 
North of this line are the Negroes proper, south are the Bantu. 
The division is primarily philological. Among the true Negroes 
the greatest linguistic confusion prevails; for instance, in certain 
parts of Nigeria it is possible to find half-a-dozen villages within 
a comparatively small area speaking, not different dialects, but 
different languages, a fact which adds greatly to the difficulty of 
political administration. To the south of the line the condition 
of affairs is entirely different; here the entire population speaks 
one or another dialect of the Bantu Languages (q.v.). As said 
before, the division is primarily linguistic and, especially upon the 
border line, does not always correspond with the variations of 
physical type. At the same time it is extremely convenient 
and to a certain extent justifiable on physical and psycho- 
logical grounds; and it may be said roughly that while the 
linguistic uniformity of the Bantu is accompanied by great 
variation of physical type, the converse is in the main true of the 
Negro proper, especially where least affected by Libyan and 
Hamitic admixture, e.g. on the Guinea coast. The variation of 
type among the Bantu is due probably to a varying admixture of 
alien blood, which is more apparent as the east coast is approached. 
This foreign element cannot be identified with certainty, but 
since the Bantu seem to approach the Hamites in those points 
where they differ from the Negro proper, and since the physical 
characteristics of Hamites and Semites are very similar, it seems 
probable that the last two races have entered into the composi- 
tion of the Bantu, though it is highly improbable that Semitic 
influence should have permeated any distance from the east coast. 
An extremely interesting section of the population not hitherto 
mentioned is constituted by the Pygmy tribes inhabiting the 
densely forested regions along the equator from Uganda to the 
Gabun and living the life of nomadic hunters. The affinities of 
this little people are undecided, owing to the small amount of 
knowledge concerning them. The theories which connected them 
with the Bushmen do not seem to be correct. It is more probable 
that they are to be classed among the Negroids, with whom they 
appear to have intermingled to a certain .extent in the upper basin 
of the Ituri, and perhaps elsewhere. As far as is known they 
speak no language peculiar to themselves but adopt that of the 
nearest agricultural tribe. They are of a dark brown complexion, 
with very broad noses, lips but slightly everted, and small but 
usually sturdy physique, though often considerably emaciated 
owing to insufficiency of food. Another peculiar tribe, also of 
short stature, are the Vaalpens of the steppe region of the north 
Transvaal. Practically nothing is known of them except that 
they are said to be very dark in colour and live in holes in the 
ground, and under rock shelters. 

Having indicated the chief races of which in various degrees 
of purity and intermixture the population of Africa is formed, 

it remains to consider them in greater detail, particu- 
ethnofogi- ' ar 'y lrom the cultural standpoint. This is hardly 
cat zones, possible without drawing attention to the main physical 

characters of the continent, as far as they affect 
the inhabitants. For ethnological purposes three principal zones 
may be distinguished; the first two are respectively a 
large region of steppes and desert in the north, and a smaller 
region of steppes and desert in the south. These two zones are 



connected by a vertical strip of grassy highlaad lying mainly 
to the east of the chain of great lakes. The third zone is a vast 
region of forest and rivers in the west centre, comprising the 
greater part of the basin of the Congo and the Guinea coast. 
The rainfall, which also has an important bearing upon the 
culture of peoples, will be found on the whole to be greatest in 
the third zone and also in the eastern highlands, and of course 
least in the desert, the steppes and savannas standing midway 
between the two. As might be expected these variations are 
accompanied by certain variations in culture. In the best- 
watered districts agriculture is naturally of the greatest import- 
ance, except where the density of the forest renders the work 
of clearing too arduous. The main portion therefore of the 
inhabitants of the forest zone are agriculturists, save only the 
nomad Pygmies, who live in the inmost recesses of the forest 
and support themselves by hunting the game with which it 
abounds. Agriculture, too, flourishes in the eastern highlands, 
and throughout the greater part of the steppe and savanna 
region of the northern and southern zones, especially the latter. 
In fact the only Bantu tribes who are not agriculturists are the 
Ova-Herero of German South- West Africa, whose purely pastoral 
habits are the natural outcome of the barren country they in- 
habit. But the wide open plains and slopes surrounding the 
forest area are eminently suited to cattle-breeding, and there are 
few tribes who do not take advantage of the fact. At the same 
time a natural check is imposed upon the desire for cattle, 
which is so characteristic of the Bantu peoples. This is con- 
stituted by the tsetse fly, which renders a pastoral life absolutely 
impossible throughout large tracts in central and southern 
Africa. In the northern zone this check is absent, and the 
number of more essentially pastoral peoples, such as the eastern 
Hamites, Masai, Dinka, Fula, &c, correspondingly greater. 
The desert regions yield support only to nomadic peoples, such 
as the Tuareg, Tibbu, Bedouins and Bushmen, though the 
presence of numerous oases in the north renders the condition 
of life easier for the inhabitants. Upon geographical conditions 
likewise depend to a large extent the political conditions pre- 
vailing among the various tribes. Thus among the wandering 
tribes of the desert and of the heart of the forests, where large 
communities are impossible, a patriarchal system prevails with 
the family as the unit. Where the forest is less dense and small 
agricultural communities begin to make their appearance, the 
unit expands to the village with its headman. Where the forest 
thins to the savanna and steppe, and communication is easier, 
are found the larger kingdoms and " empires " such as, in the 
north those established by the Songhai, Hausa, Fula, Bagirmi, 
Ba-Hima, &c, and in the south the states of Lunda, Kazembe, 
the Ba-Rotse, &c. 

But if ease of communication is favourable to the rise of 
large states and the cultural progress that usually accompanies 
it, it is, nevertheless, often fatal to the very culture which, at 
first, it fostered, in so far as the absence of natural boundaries 
renders invasion easy. A good example of this is furnished by 
the history of the western Sudan and particularly of East and 
South-East Africa. From its geographical position Africa looks 
naturally to the east, and it is on this side that it has been most 
affected by external culture both by land (across the Sinaitic 
peninsula) and by sea. Though a certain amount of Indonesian 
and even aboriginal Indian influence has been traced in African 
ethnography, the people who have produced the most serious 
ethnic disturbances (apart from modern Europeans) are the 
Arabs. This is particularly the case in East Africa, where the 
systematic slave raids organized by them and carried out with 
the assistance of various warlike tribes reduced vast regions 
to a state of desolation. In the north and west of Africa, how- 
ever, the Arab has had a less destructive but more extensive 
and permanent influence in spreading the Mahommedan religion 
throughout the whole of the Sudan. 

The fact that the physical geography of Africa affords fewer 
natural obstacles to racial movements on the side most exposed 
to foreign influence, renders it obvious that the culture most 
characteristically African must be sought on the other side 



ETHNOLOGY] 



AFRICA 



327 



It is therefore in the forests of the Congo, and among the lagoons 
and estuaries of the Guinea coast, that this earlier culture will 
The char- most probably be found. That there is a culture 
acteristic distinctive of this area, irrespective of the linguistic 
African ]j ne diving the Bantu from the Negro proper, has 
now been recognized. Its main features may be 
summed as follows: — a purely agricultural life, with the plan- 
tain, yam and manioc (the last two of American origin) as the 
staple food; cannibalism common; rectangular houses with 
ridged roofs; scar-tattooing; clothing of bark-cloth or palm-fibre; 
occasional chipping or extraction of upper incisors; bows with 
strings of cane, as the principal weapons, shields of wood or 
wickerwork: religion, a primitive form of fetishism with the 
belief that death is due to witchcraft; ordeals, secret societies, 
the use of masks and anthropomorphic figures, and wooden 
gongs. With this may be contrasted the culture of the Bantu 
peoples to the south and east, also agriculturists, but in addition, 
where possible, great cattie-breeders, whose staple food is millet 
and milk. These are distinguished by circular huts with domed 
or conical roofs; clothing of skin or leather; occasional chipping 
or extraction of lower incisors; spears as the principal weapons, 
bows, where found, with a sinew cord, shields of hide or leather; 
religion, ancestor-worship with belief in the . power of the 
magicians as rain-makers. Though this difference in culture 
may well be explained on the supposition that the first is the 
older and more 'representative of Africa, this theory must not 
be pushed too far. Many of the distinguishing characteristics 
of the two regions are doubtless due simply to environment, 
even the difference in religion. Ancestor-worship occurs most 
naturally among a people where tribal organization has reached 
a fairly advanced stage, and is the natural outcome of patriotic 
reverence for a successful chief and his councillors. Rain-making, 
too, is of little importance in a well-watered region, but a matter 
of vital interest to an agricultural people where the rainfall 
is slight and irregular. 

Within the eastern and southern Bantu area certain cultural 
variations occur; beehive huts are found among the Zulu- 
Xosa and Herero, giving place among the Bechuana to the 
cylindrical variety with conical roof, a type which, with few 
exceptions, extends north to Abyssinia. The tanged spear- 
head characteristic of the south is replaced by the socketed 
variety towards the north. Circumcision, characteristic of the 
Zulu-Xosa and Bechuana, is not practised by many tribes farther 
north; tooth-mutilation, on the contrary, is absent among the 
more southern tribes. The lip-plug is found in the eastern area, 
especially among the Nyasa tribes, but not in the south. The 
head-rest common in the south-east and the southern fringe of 
the forest area is not found far north of Tanganyika until the 
Horn of Africa is reached. 

In the regions outside the western area occupied by the Negro 
proper, exclusive of the upper Nile, the similarities of culture 
outweigh the differences. Here the cylindrical type of hut 
prevails; clothing is of skin or leather but is very scanty; iron 
ornaments are worn in profusion; arrows are not feathered; 
shields of hide, spears with leather sheaths are found and also 
fighting bracelets. Certain small differences appear between 
the eastern and western portions, the dividing line being formed 
by the boundary between Bornu and Hausaland. Characteristic 
of the east are the harp and the throwing-club and throwing- 
knife, the last of which has penetrated into the forest area. 
Typical of the west are the bow and the dagger with the ring 
hilt. The tribes of the upper Nile are somewhat specialized, 
though here, too, are found the cylindrical hut, iron ornaments, 
fighting bracelets, &c, characteristic of the Sudanese tribes. 
Here the removal of the lower incisors is common, and circum- 
cision entirely absent. 

Throughout the rest of the Sudan is found Senjitic culture 
introduced by the Arabized Libyan. Circumcision, as is usual 
among Mahommedan tribes, is universal, and tooth-mutilation 
absent; of other characteristics, the use of the sword has pene- 
trated to the northern portion of the forest area. The culture 
prevailing in the Horn of Africa is, naturally, mainly Hamito- 



Semitic; here are found both cylindrical and bee-hive huts, 
the sword (which has been adopted by the Masai to the south), 
the lyre (which has found its way to some of the Nilotic tribes) 
and the head-rest. Circumcision is practically universal. 

As has been said earlier, the history of Africa reaches back 
but a short distance, except, of course, as far as the lower Nile 
valley and Roman Africa is concerned; elsewhere no records 
exist, save tribal traditions, and these only relate to very recent 
events. Even archaeology, which can often sketch the main 
outlines of a people's history, is here practically powerless, 
owing to the insufficiency of data. It is true that stone imple- 
ments of palaeolithic and neolithic types are found sporadically 
in the Nile valley, Somaliland, on the Zambezi, in Cape Colony 
and the northern portions of the Congo Free State, as well as 
in Algeria and Tunisia; but the localities are far too few and 
too widely separated to warrant the inference that they are to 
be in any way connected. Moreover, where stone implements 
are found they are, as a rule, very near, even actually on, the 
surface of the earth; nothing occurs resembling the regular 
stratification of Europe, and consequently no argument based 
on geological grounds is possible. 

The lower Nile valley, however, forms an exception; flint 
implements of a palaeolithic type have been found near Thebes, 
not only on the surface of the ground, which for several thousand 
years has been desert owing to the contraction of the river-bed, 
but also in stratified gravel of an older date. References to a 
number of papers bearing on the discussion to which theii 
discovery has given rise may be found in an article by Mr H. R. 
Hall in Man, 1905, No. 19. The Egyptian and also the Somali- 
land finds appear to be true palaeoliths in type and remarkably 
similar to those found in Europe. But evidence bearing on the 
Stone age in Africa, if the latter existed apart from the localities 
mentioned, is so slight that little can be said save that from the 
available evidence the palaeoliths of the Nile valley alone can 
with any degree of certainty be assigned to a remote period of 
antiquity, and that the chips scattered over Mashonaland and 
the regions occupied within historic times by Bushmen are 
the most recent; since it has been shown that the stone flakes 
were used by the medieval Makalanga to engrave their hard 
pottery and the Bushmen were still using stone implements in 
the 19th century. Other early remains, but of equally uncertain 
date, are the stone circles of Algeria, the Cross river and the 
Gambia. The large system of ruined forts and " cities " in 
Mashonaland, at Zimbabwe and elsewhere, concerning which so 
many ingenious theories have been woven, have been proved to 
date from medieval times. 

Thus while in Europe there is a Stone age. divided into periods 
according to various types of implement disposed in geological 
strata, and followed in orderly succession by the ages origin and 
of Bronze and Iron, in Africa can be found no true spread of 
Stone age and practically no Bronze at all. The reason tbe ra < !lal 
is not far to seek; Africa is a country of iron, which is s ° c 
found distributed widely throughout the continent in ores so 
rich that the metal can be extracted with very little trouble 
and by the simplest methods. Iron has been worked from 
time immemorial by the Negroid peoples, and whole tribes 
are found whose chief industry is the smelting and forging 
of the metal. Under such conditions, questions relating to the 
origin and spread of the racial stocks which form the population 
of Africa cannot be answered with any certainty; at best only a 
certain amount of probability can be attained. 

Five of these racial stocks have been mentioned: Bushman, 
Negro, Hamite, Semite, Libyan, the last three probably related 
through some common ancestor. Of these the honour of being 
considered the most truly African belongs to the two first. It 
is true that people of Negroid type are found elsewhere, princi- 
pally in Melanesia, but as yet their possible connexion with the 
African Negro is little more than theoretical, and for the present 
purposes it need not be considered. 

The origin of the Bushman is lost in obscurity, but he may be 
conceived as the original inhabitant of the southern portion of 
the continent. The original home of the Negro, at first an 



328 



AFRICA 



[ETHNOLOGY 



agriculturist, is most probably to be found in the neighbourhood 
of the great lakes, whence he penetrated along the fringe of the 
Sahara to the west and across the eastern highlands southward. 
Northerly expansion was prevented by the early occupation 
of the Nile valley, the only easy route to the Mediterranean, 
but there seems no doubt that the population of ancient Egypt 
contained a distinct Negroid element. The question as to the 
ethnic affinities of the pre-dynastic Egyptians is still unsolved; 
but they may be regarded as, in the main, Hamitic, though it is 
a question how far it is just to apply a name which implies a 
definite specialization in what may be comparatively modern 
times to a people of such antiquity. 

The Horn of Africa appears to have been the centre from 
which the Hamites spread, and the pressure they seem to have 
applied to the Negro tribes, themselves also in process of expan- 
sion, sent forth larger waves of emigrants from the latter. These 
emigrants, already affected by the Hamitic pastoral culture, 
and with a strain of Hamitic blood in their veins, passed rapidly 
down the open tract in the east, doubtless exterminating their 
predecessors, except such few as took refuge in the mountains 
and swamps. The advance-guard of this wave of pastoral 
Negroids, in fact primitive Bantu, mingled with the Bushmen 
and produced the Hottentots. The penetration of the forest 
area must certainly have taken longer and was probably accom- 
plished as much from the south-east, up the Zambezi valley, 
as from any Other quarter. It was a more peaceful process, 
since natural obstacles are unfavourable to rapid movements of 
large bodies of immigrants, though not so serious as to prevent 
the spread of language and culture. A modern parallel to the 
spread of Bantu speech is found in the rise of the Hausa language, 
which is gradually enlarging its sphere of influence in the western 
and central Sudan. Thus those qualities, physical and otherwise, 
in which the Bantu approach the Hamites gradually fade as we 
proceed westward through the Congo basin, while in the east, 
among the tribes to the west of Tanganyika and on the upper 
Zambezi, " transitional " forms of culture are found. In later 
times this gradual pressure from the south-east became greater, 
and resulted, at a comparatively recent date, in the irruption of 
the Fang into the Gabun. 

The earlier stages of the southern movement must have been 
accompanied by a similar movement westward between the 
Sahara and the forest; and, probably, at the same time, or even 
earlier, the Libyans crossing the desert had begun to press upon 
the primitive Negroes from the north. In this way were produced 
the Fula, who mingled further with the Negro to give birth to 
the Mandingo, Wolof and Tukulor. It would appear that either 
Libyan (Fula) or, less probably, Hamitic, blood enters into the 
composition of the Zandeh peoples on the Nile-Congo watershed. 
These Libyans or Berbers, included by G. Sergi in his " Mediter- 
ranean Race," were active on the north coast of Africa in very 
early times, and had relations with the Egyptians from a pre- 
historic period. For long these movements continued, always 
in the same direction, from north to south and from east to 
west; though, of course, more rapid changes took place in the 
open country, especially in the great eastern highway from 
north to south, than in the forest area. Large states arose in 
the western Sudan; Ghana flourished in the 7th century a.d., 
Melle in the nth, Songhai in the 14th, and Bornu in the 16th. 

Meanwhile in the east began the southerly movement of the 
Bechuana, which was probably spread over a considerable 
period. Later than they, but proceeding faster, came the 
Zulu-Xosa (" Kaffir ") peoples, who followed a line nearer the 
coast and outflanked them, surrounding them on the south. 
Then followed a time of great ethnical confusion in South 
Africa, during which tribes flourished, split up and disappeared; 
but ere this the culture represented by the ruins in Rhodesia 
had waxed and waned. It is uncertain who were the builders of 
the forts and " cities," but it is not improbable that they may be 
found to have been early Bechuana. The Zulu-Xosa, Bechuana 
and Herero together form a group which may conveniently be 
termed " Southern Bantu." 

Finally began a movement hitherto unparalleled in the 



history of African migration; certain peoples of Zulu blood 
began to press north, spreading destruction in their wake. Of 
these the principal were the Matabele and Angoni. The move- 
ment continued as far as the Victoria Nyanza. Here, on the 
border-line of Negro, Bantu and Hamite, important changes 
had taken place. Certain of the Negro tribes had retired to 
the swamps of the Nile, and had become somewhat specialized, 
both physically and culturally (Shilluk, Dinka, Alur, Acholi, 
&c). These had blended with the Hamites to produce such 
races as the Masai and kindred tribes. The old Kitwara empire, 
which comprised the plateau land between the Ruwenzori 
range and Kavirondo, had broken up into small states, usually 
governed by a Hamitic (Ba-Hima) aristocracy. The more 
extensive Zang (Zenj) empire, of which the name Zanzibar 
(Zanguebar) is a lasting memorial, extending along the sea-board 
from Somaliland to the Zambezi, was also extinct. The Arabs 
had established themselves firmly on the coast, and thence made 
continual slave-raids into the interior, penetrating later to the 
Congo. The Swahili, inhabiting the coast-line from the equator 
to about 16° S., are a somewhat heterogeneous mixture of Bantu 
with a tinge of Arab blood. 

In the neighbourhood of Victoria Nyanza, where Hamite, 
Bantu, Nilotic Negro and Pygmy are found in close contact, 
the ethnic relations of tribes are often puzzling, but the Bantu not 
under a Hamitic domination have been divided by F. Stuhlmann 
into the Older Bantu (Wanyamwezi, Wasukuma, Wasambara, 
Waseguha, Wasagara, Wasaramo, &c.) and the Bantu of Later 
Immigration (Wakikuyu, Wakamba, Wapokomo, Wataita, 
Wachaga, &c), who are more strongly Hamitized and in many 
cases have adopted Masai customs. These peoples, from the 
Victoria Nyanza to the Zambezi, may conveniently be termed 
the " Eastern Bantu." 

Turning to the Congo basin in the south, the great Luba and 
Lunda peoples are found stretching nearly across the continent, 
the latter, from at any rate the end of the 16th century until the 
close of the 19th century, more or less united under a single ruler, 
styled Muata Yanvo. These seem to have been the most recent 
immigrants from the south-east, and to exhibit certain affinities 
with the Barotse on the upper Zambezi. Among the western 
Baluba, or Bashilange, a remarkable politico-religious revolution 
took place at a comparatively recent date, initiated by a secret 
society termed Bena Riamba or " Sons of Hemp," and resulted 
in the subordination of the old fetishism to a cult of hemp, in 
accordance with which all hemp-smokers consider themselves 
brothers, and the duty of mutual hospitality, &c, is acknow- 
ledged. North of these, in the great bend of the Congo, are the 
Balolo, &c, the Balolo a nation of iron-workers; and westward, 
on the Kasai, the Bakuba, and a large number of tribes as yet 
imperfectly known. Farther west are the tribes of Angola, many 
of whom were included within the old " Congo empire," of which 
the kingdom of Loango was an offshoot. North of the latter lies 
the Gabun, with a large number of small tribes dominated by the 
Fang who are recent arrivals from the Congo. Farther to the 
north are the Bali and other tribes of the Cameroon, among whom 
many primitive Negroid elements begin to appear. Eastward 
are the Zandeh peoples of the Welle district (primitive Negroids 
with a Hamitic or, more probably, Libyan strain) , with whom the 
Dor tribe of Nilotes on their eastern border show certain affinities; 
while to the west along the coast are the Guinea Negroes of 
primitive type. Here, amidst great linguistic confusion, may be 
distinguished the tribes of Yoruba speech in the Niger delta and 
the east portion of the Slave Coast; those of Ewe speech, in the 
western portion of the latter; and those of Ga and Tshi speech, 
on the Gold Coast. Among the last two groups respectively may 
be mentioned the Dahomi and Ashanti. Similar tribes are found 
along the coast to the Bissagos Islands, though the introduction 
in Sierra Leone and Liberia of settlements of repatriated slaves 
from the American plantations has in those places modified the 
original ethnic distribution. Leaving the forest zone and entering 
the more open country there are, on the north from the Niger 
to the Nile, a number of Negroids strongly tinged with Libyan 
blood and professing the Mahornmedan religion. Such are the 



ETHNOLOGY] 



AFRICA 



329 



In Mads 
gascar, 



Mandingo, the Songhai, the Fula, Hausa, Kanuri, Bagirmi, 
Kanembu, and the peoples of Wadai and Darfur; the few 
aborigines who persist, on the southern fringe of the Chad basin, 
are imperfectly known. 

The island of Madagascar, belonging to the African continent, 
still remains for discussion. Here the ethnological conditions are 
Peculiar peculiar. Before the French occupation the dominant 
conditions people were the Hova, a Malayo-Indonesian people 
who must have come from the Malay Peninsula or the 
adjacent islands. The date of their immigration has been 
the subject of a good deal of dispute, but it may be argued that 
their arrival must have taken place in early times, since Malagasy 
speech, which is the language of the island, is principally Malayo- 
Polynesian in origin, and contains no traces of Sanskrit. Such 
traces, introduced with Hinduism, are present in all the cultivated 
languages of Malaysia at the present day. The Hova occupy the 
table-land of Imerina and form the first of the three main groups 
into which the population of Madagascar may be divided. They 
are short, of an olive-yellow complexion and have straight or 
faintly wavy hair. On the east coast are the Malagasy, who in 
physical characteristics stand halfway between the Hova and the 
Sakalava, the last occupying the remaining portion of the island 
and displaying almost pure Negroid characteristics. 

Though the Hova belong to a race naturally addicted to sea- 
faring, the contrary is the case respecting the Negroid population, 
and the presence of the latter in the island has been explained by 
the supposition that they were imported by the Hova. Other 
authorities assign less antiquity to the Hova immigration and 
believe that they found the Negroid tribes already in occupation 
of the island. 

As might be expected, the culture found in Madagascar con- 
tains two elements, Negroid and Malayo-Indonesian. The first of 
these two shows certain affinities with the culture characteristic 
of the western area of Africa, such as rectangular huts, clothing of 
bark and palm-fibre, fetishism, &c, but cattle-breeding is found 
as well as agriculture. However, the Negroid tribes are more and 
more adopting the customs and mode of life of the Hova, among 
whom are found pile-houses, the sarong, fadi or tabu applied to 
food, a non- African form of bellows, &c, all characteristic of 
their original home. The Hova, during the 19th century! em- 
braced Christianity, but retain, nevertheless, many of their old 
animistic beliefs; their original social organization in three 
classes, andriana or nobles, hova or freemen, and andevo or slaves, 
has been modified by the French, who have abolished kingship 
and slavery. An Arab infusion is also to be noticed, especially on 
the north-east and south-east, coasts. 

It is impossible to give a complete list of the tribes inhabiting 
Africa, owing to the fact that the country is not fully explored. 
Even where the names of the tribes are known their ethnic 
relations are still a matter of uncertainty in many localities. 

The following list, therefore, must be regarded as purely tenta- 
tive, and liable to correction in the light of fuller information: — 

AFRICAN TRIBAL DISTRIBUTION 

LIBYANS 
(North Africa, excluding Egypt) 
Berbers, including — 
Kabyles 
Mzab 
Shawia 
Tuareg 

LIBYO-NEGROID TRANSITIONAL 
Fula (West Sudan) 
Tibbu (Central Sudan) 

HA MITES 
(East Sudan and Horn of Africa) 
Beja, including — 
Ababda 
Hadendoa 
Bisharin 
Beni-Amer 
Hamran 



HA MITES— continued 

(East Sudan and Horn of Africa) — continued 

Galla _ 
Somali 

Danakil (Afar) 
Ba-Hima, including — 

Wa-Tussi 

Wa-Hha 

Wa-Rundi 

Wa- Ruanda 

HAMITO-SEMITES 

Fellahin (Egypt) 

Abyssinians (with Negroid admixture) 

HAMITO-NEGROID TRANSITIONAL 
Masai 
Wa-Kuafi 

NEGROID TRIBES 



West Sudan 
Tukulor 
Wolof 
Serer 
Leybu 
Mandingo, including- 

Kassonke 

Yallonke 

Soninke 

Bambara 

Vei 

Susu 

Solima 

Malinke 

Probably also — 
Mossi 
Borgu 



Central Sudan 
Songhai 
Hausa 
Bagirmi 
Kanembu 
Kanuri 
Tama 
Maba 
Birkit 
Massalit 
Korunga 
Kabbaga 
&c. 



Eastern 



Fur 

Dago 

Kunjara 

Tegele 

Nuba 



Kargo 
Kulfan 
Kolaji 
Tumali 



Zondek Tribes 
(Akin to Nilotics, but 

probably with Fula 

element) 
Azandeh (Niam Niam) 
Makaraka 
Mundu 
Mangbettu 
Ababwa 
Mege 
Abisanga 



Tombo 






MabodefP^r 
Momfu [element 


Gurma 
Gurunga 


aably wi 
andingar 
lements 




Dagomba 




Allied are — 


Mampursi 




Banziri Languassi 


Gonja 


ss" 




Ndris Wia-Wia 


&c. 


a. 




Togbo Awaka 






&c. 




NEGROES 






West African Tribes 






Tribes of Tshi and Ga Tribes of Yoruba 




speech, including — 


speech, including — 


Khabunk& 






Balanta 


Ashanti 


Yoruba 


Bagnori 


Safwi 


Ibadan 


Bagnum 


Denkera 


Ketu 


Felup, including — 


Bekwai 


Egba 


Ayamat 


Nkoranza 


Tebu 
Remo 


Jola 


Adansi 


Jigush 


Assin 


Ode 


Vaca 


Wassaw 


Illorin 


Joat 
Karon 


Ahanta 


Ijesa 


Fanti 


Ondo 


Banyum 


Agona 


Mahin 


Banjar 


Akwapim 


Bini 


Fulum 


Akim 


Kakanda 


Bayot 


Akwamu 


Wari 


&c. 


Kwao 


Ibo 


Bujagos 


Ga 


Efik 


Biafare 




Andoni 


Landuman 


Tribes of Ewe speech, 


Kwa 


Nalu 


including — 


Ibibio 


Baga 




Ekoi 


Sape 


Dahomi 


Inokun 


Bulam 


Eweawo 


Akunakuna 


Mendi 


Agotine 


Munshi 


Limba 


Krepi 


Ik we 


Gallina 


Avenor 




Timni 


Awuna 




Pessi 


Agbosomi 




Gola 


Aflao 




Kondo 


Ataklu 




Bassa 


Krikor 




Kru 


Geng 




Grebo 


Attakpami ■ 




Awekwom 


Aja 




Agni 


Ewemi 




Oshiu 




Appa 





33° 



AFRICA 



[ETHNOLOGY 



NEGROES — continued 



Central Negroes 
Bolo 
Yako 
Tangala 
Kali 
Mishi 
Doma 
Mosgu, including — 

Mandara 

Margi 

Logon 

Gamergu 

Keribina 
Yedina 
Kuri 

&c. 

Nilotics with affinity 
with Zandeh tribes 
Dor (Bongo) 

NEGRO-BANTU 
TRANSITIONAL 



Bali 

Ba-Kossi 

Ba-Ngwa 

Ba-Nyang 

Ngolo 

Ba-Fo 

Ba-Kundu > 

Isubu 



Ba-Kwiri 

Abo 

Dualla 

Bassa 

Ba-Noko 

Ba-Puko 

Ba-Koko 



Eastern Negroes 
Pure Nilotics 
Shilluk 
Nuer 
Dinka 
Jur (Diur) 
Mittu 
Tibbeh 
Madi 
Lendu 
Alur (Lur) 
Acholi 
Lango 
Abaka 
Golo 

Nilotics with affinity 
with Masai 
Latuka 
Bari 

NILOTIC-BANTU 
TRANSITIONAL 

Ja-Luo 



PYGMY TRIBES 
(Central Africa) 
Akka 
Ba-Mbute 
Ba-Bongo 
Ashango 
&c. 



BANTU NEGROIDS— continued 



Western 



Western 

Ogowe 
Ashira 
Ishogo 
Ashango 
Bakalai 
Nkomi 
Orungu 
Mpongwe 
Oshekiani 
Benga 
Ininga 
Galao 
Apingi 
Okanda 
Osaka 
Aduma 
Mbamba 
Urn bete 
Bule 
Bane 
Yaunde 
Maka 
Bomone 
Kunabembe 
Fang (recent im- 
migrants from 

the Congo 

group) 
&c. 
Ba-Kongo, in- 
cluding — 

Mushi-Kongo 

Mussorongo 

Kabinda 

Ka-Kongo 

Ba-Vili 

Ma-Yumbe 

Ba-Lumbo 

Ba-Sundi 

Ba-Bwende 

Ba-Lali 

Ba-Kunya 



BANTU NEGROIDS 
Central 

Luba-Lunda Group 
Ba-Luba, including — 

Ba-Songe 

Wa-Rua 

Wa-Guha 

Katanga 

Ba-Shilange (with 
Ba-Kete ele- 
ment) 
Ba-Lunda 

Probably connected 
are — 
Manyema 
Ba-Kumu 
Wa-Regga 
Ba-Rotse, including — 

Ma-Mbunda 

Ma-Supia 

Ma-Shukulumbwe 

Ba-Tonga 
and probably 

Va-Lovale 



Eastern 

Lacuslrians 
Ba-Nyoro 
Ba-Toro 
Wa-Siba 
Wa-Sinja 
Wa-Kerewe 
Wa-Shashi 
Wa-Rundi 
Ba-Iro 
Ba-Ganda 
Ba-Soga 

Ba-Kavirondo, includ- 
ing — 

Awaware 

Awarimi 

Awakisii 
&c. 



Tribes of the Congo 
Betid 
Ba-Kussu 
Ba-Tetela 
Ba-Songo Mino 
.Ba-Kuba 
Ba-Lolo 
Ba-Kuti 
Ba-Mbala 
Ba-Huana 
Ba-Yaka 
Ba-Pindi 
Ba-Kwese 
&c. 

Tribes of the Congo 

Bank 

Wa-Genia 

Ba-Soko 

Ba-Poto 

Mobali 

Mogwandi 

_ .. , fconnected 
Ba-Ngalal ^^ Zan . 

Ba-Bangi], deh group 
Wa-Buma 



Bantu of Recent 

Immigration 

Wa-Kikuyu 

Wa-Kamba 

Wa-Pokomo 

Wa-Duruma 

Wa-Digo 

Wa-Giriama 

Wa-Taita 

Wa-Nyaturu 

Wa-Iramba 

Wa-Mbugwe 

Wa-Kaguru 

... _ fpossible 

Wa-Gogo J Masai 

Wa-Chaga [element 

Older Bantu 

Wa-Nyamwezi, includ- 
ing— 

Wa-Sukuma 

Wa-Sumbwa 

Wa-Nyanyembe 

Wa-Tui 

Wa-Kimbu 

Wa-Kanongo 

Wa-Wende 






He 



Central 

Ba-Nunu 
Ba-Loi 
Ba-Teke 
Wa-Pfuru 
Wa-Mbundu 
Wa-Mfumu 
Ba-Nsinik 
Ma-Wumba 
Ma-Yakalla 
&c. 



TRANSITIONAL 
FROM CENTRAL 
TO SOUTHERN 

BANTU 
Amboela 
Ganguela 
Kioko 
Minungo 
Imbangala 
Ba-Achinji 
Golo 
Hollo 

&c. 
Mbunda peoples in- 
cluding — 

Bihe 

Dembo 

Mbaka 

Ngola 

Bondo 

Ba-Ngala 

Songo 

Haku 

Lubolo 

Kisama 
&c. 



Eastern 

Wa-Gunda 

Wa-Guru 

Wa-Galla 
Wa-Sambara 
Wa-Seguha 
Wa-Nguru 
Wa-Sagara 
Wa-Doe 
Wa-Khutu 
Wa-Saramo 
Wa-Hehe 
Wa-Bena 
Wa-Sanga 

Wa-Swahili (with Arab 
elements) 

Connected are — 
Wa-Kisi 
Wa-Mpoto 
Ba-Tonga 
Ba-Tumbuka 
Wa-Nyika 
Wa- Nyam wanga 
A-Mambwe 
Wa-Fipa 
Wa-Rungu 
A-Wemba 
A-Chewa 
A-Maravi 
Ba-Senga 
Ba-Bisa 
A-Jawa (Yaos) 
Wa-Mwera 
Wa-Gindo 
Ma-Konde 
Ma-Wia 
Ma-Nganja 
Ma-Kua 



SO UTHERN BANTU 
{.South and South-East Africa) 



J3 

j-^2 



Ba-Nyai 
Ma-Kalanga, 

including 

Mashoha 
Ba-Ronga £ffl 

J *C 
Be-Chuana, includ- 
ing — 

Ba-Tlapin 

Ba-Rolong 

Ba-Ratlou 

Ba-Taung 

Ba-Rapulana 

Ba-Seleka 

Ba-Hurutsi 

Ba-Tlaru 

Ba-Mangwato 

Ba-Tauana 

Ba-Ngwaketse 

Ba-Kuena 
&c. 

HAMITO-BANTU 

BUSHMAN 
TRANSITIONAL 

Hottentots, in-"1 

eluding — I S. W. 
Namaqua [Africa 
Koranna J 



Ama-Zulu, including— 

Ama-Swazi 

Ama-Tonga 

Matabele 

Angoni 

Ma-Gwangwara 

Ma-Huhu 

Ma-Viti 

Ma-Situ 

Ma-Henge 
&c. 
Ama-Xosa, including- 

Ama-Gcaleka 

Ama-Hahabe 

Ama-Ngqika 

Ama-Tembu 

Ama-Pondo 
&c. 
Ova-Herero 
Ova-Mpo 



BUSHMEN 



TRIBES IN MADAGASCAR 



MALA YO-INDONESIANS 

Hova 

Betsileo (slight Bantu admixture) 

HOVA-BANTU 
TRANSITIONAL 

Malagasy, including — 

Bestimisaraka Antanosi 

Antambahoaka Antsihanaka 
Antaimoro Antanala 

Antaifasina Antaisara 

Antaisaka &c. 



BANTU-NEGROIDS 

Sakalava, including — 
Menabe 
Milaka 
Ronondra 
Mahafali 
&C. 



(T. A. J.) 



HISTORY] 



AFRICA 



33 1 



IV. History 

The origin and meaning of the name of the continent are 
discussed elsewhere (see Africa, Roman). The word Africa was 
applied originally to the country in the immediate neighbour- 
hood of Carthage, that part of the continent first known to the 
Romans, and it was subsequently extended with their increas- 
ing knowledge, till it came at last to include all that they knew 
of the continent. The Arabs still confine the name Ifrikia to the 
territory of Tunisia. 

The valley of the lower Nile was the home in remotest antiquity 
of a civilized race. Egyptian culture had, however, remarkably 
Phoenician little direct influence on the rest of the continent, a 
and Greek result due in large measure to the fact that Egypt is 
colon iza- snut g landwards by immense deserts. If ancient 
""*• Egypt and Ethiopia (q.v.) be excluded, the story of 

Africa is largely a record of the doings of its Asiatic and 
European conquerors and colonizers, Abyssinia being the 
only state which throughout historic times has maintained its 
independence. The countries bordering the Mediterranean were 
first exploited by the Phoenicians, whose earliest settlements 
were made before iooo B.C. • Carthage, founded about 800 B.C., 
speedily grew into a city without rival in the Mediterranean, 
and the Phoenicians, subduing the Berber tribes, who then as 
now formed the bulk of the population, became masters of all 
the habitable region of North Africa west of the Great Syrtis, 
and found in commerce a source of immense prosperity. Both 
Egyptians and Carthaginians made attempts to reach the un- 
known parts of the continent by sea. Herodotus relates that an 
expedition under Phoenician navigators, employed by Necho, 
king of Egypt, c. 600 B.C., circumnavigated Africa from the Red 
Sea to the Mediterranean, a voyage stated to have been accom- 
plished in three years. Apart from the reported circumnaviga- 
tion of the continent, the west coast was well known to the 
Phoenicians as far as Cape Nun, and c. 520 B.C. Hanno, a Cartha- 
ginian, explored the coast as far, perhaps, as the Bight of Benin, 
certainly as far as Sierra Leone. A vague knowledge of the 
Niger regions was also possessed by the Phoenicians. 

Meantime the first European colonists had planted themselves 
in Africa. At the point where the continent approaches nearest 
the Greek islands, Greeks founded the city of Cyrene (c. 631 B.C.). 
Cyrenaica became a flourishing colony, though being hemmed in 
on all sides by absolute desert it had little or no influence on 
inner Africa. The Greeks, however, exerted a powerful influence 
in Egypt. To Alexander the Great the city of Alexandria owes 
its foundation (332 B.C.), and under the Hellenistic dynasty of 
the Ptolemies attempts were made to penetrate southward, and 
in this way was obtained some knowledge of Abyssinia. Neither 
Cyrenaica nor Egypt was a serious rival to the Carthaginians, 
but all three powers were eventually supplanted by the Romans. 
After centuries of rivalry for supremacy 1 the struggle was 
ended by the fall of Carthage in 146 B.C. Within little more 
than a century from that date Egypt and Cyrene had become 
incorporated in the Roman empire. Under Rome the settled 
portions of the country were very prosperous, and a Latin strain 
was introduced into the land. Though Fezzan was occupied by 
them, the Romans elsewhere found the Sahara an impassable 
barrier. Nubia and Abyssinia were reached, but an expedition 
sent by the emperor Nero to discover the source of the Nile 
ended in failure. The utmost extent of geographical knowledge 
of the continent is shown in the writings of Ptolemy (2nd century 
a.d.), who knew of or guessed the existence of the great lake 
reservoirs of the Nile and had heard of the river Niger. Still 
Africa for the civilized world remained simply the countries 
bordering the Mediterranean. The continual struggle between 
Rome and the Berber tribes; the introduction of Christianity 
and the glories and sufferings of the Egyptian and African 
Churches; the invasion and conquest of the African provinces 

1 Commercial treaties between Carthage and Rome were made 
in the 6th and 5th centuries B.C. The first armed conflict between 
the rival powers, begun in 264 B.C., was a contest for the possession 
of Sicily. 



by the Vandals in the 5th century; the passing of the supreme 
power in the following century to the Byzantine empire — all 
these events are told fully elsewhere. 

In the 7 th century of the Christian era occurred an event 
destined to have a permanent influence on the whole continent. 
Invading first Egypt, an Arab host, fanatical believers NortB 
in the new faith of Mahommed, conquered the whole Africa 
country from the Red Sea to the Atlantic and carried conquered 
the Crescent into Spain. Throughout North Africa b Y tb J ! 
Christianity well-nigh disappeared, save in Egypt 
(where the Coptic Church was suffered to exist), and Upper 
Nubia and Abyssinia, which were not subdued by the Moslems. 
In the 8th, 9th and 10th centuries the Arabs in Africa were 
numerically weak; they held the countries they had conquered 
by the sword only, but in the nth century there was a great 
Arab immigration, resulting in a large absorption of Berber 
blood. Even before this the Berbers had very generally adopted 
the speech and religion of their conquerors. Arab influence and 
the Mahommedan religion thus became indelibly stamped on 
northern Africa. Together they spread southward across the 
Sahara. They also became firmly established along the eastern 
sea-board, where Arabs, Persians and Indians planted flourishing 
colonies, such as Mombasa, Malindi and Sofala, playing a role, 
maritime and commercial, analogous to that filled in earlier 
centuries by the Carthaginians on the northern sea-board. Of 
these eastern cities and states both Europe and the Arabs of 
North Africa were long ignorant. 

The first Arab invaders had recognized the authority of the 
caliphs of Bagdad, and the Aghlabite dynasty — founded by 
Aghlab, one of Haroun al Raschid's generals, at the close of the 
8th century — ruled as vassals of the caliphate. However, early 
in the 10th century the Fatimite dynasty established itself in 
Egypt, where Cairo had been founded a.d. 968, and from there 
ruled as far west as the Atlantic. Later still arose other dynasties 
such as the Almoravides and Almohades. Eventually 
the Turks, who had conquered Constantinople in 1453, a ££f „7<fie 
and had seized Egypt in 151 7, established the regencies Turks. 
of Algeria, Tunisia and Tripoli (between 1519 and 
1551), Morocco remaining an independent Arabized Berber state 
under the Sharifan dynasty, which had its beginnings at the end 
of the 13 th century. Under the earlier dynasties Arabian or 
Moorish culture had attained a high degree of excellence, while 
the spirit of adventure and the proselytizing zeal of the followers 
of Islam led to a considerable extension of the knowledge of the 
continent. This was rendered more easy by their use of the 
camel (first introduced into Africa by the Persian conquerors of 
Egypt), which enabled the Arabs to traverse the desert. In 
this way Senegambia and the middle Niger regions fell under 
the influence of the Arabs and Berbers, but it was not until 1591 
that Timbuktu — a city founded in the nth century — became 
Moslem. That city had been reached in 1352 by the great Arab 
traveller Ibn Batuta, to whose journey to Mombasa and Quiloa 
(Kilwa) was due the first accurate knowledge of those flourishing 
Moslem cities on the east African sea-boards. Except along this 
sea-board, which was colonized directly from Asia, Arab progress 
southward was stopped by the broad belt of dense forest which, 
stretching almost across the continent somewhat south of 10° N., 
barred their advance as effectually as had the Sahara that of 
their predecessors, and cut them off from knowledge of the 
Guinea coast and of all Africa beyond. One of the regions which 
came latest under Arab control was that of Nubia, where a 
Christian civilization and state existed up to the 14th century. 

For a time the Moslem conquests in South Europe had virtually 
made of the Mediterranean an Arab lake, but the expulsion in 
the nth century of the Saracens from Sicily and southern Italy 
by the Normans was followed by descents of the conquerors on 
Tunisia and Tripoli. Somewhat later a busy trade with the 
African coast-lands, and especially with Egypt, was developed 
by Venice, Pisa, Genoa and other cities of North Italy. By the 
end of the 15th century Spain had completely thrown off the 
Moslem yoke, but even while the Moors were still in Granada, 
Portugal was strong enough to carry the war into Africa. 



332 



AFRICA 



[HISTORY 



In 141 5 a Portuguese force captured the citadel of Ceuta on the 
Moorish coast. From that time onward Portugal repeatedly 
S aia and interfered in the affairs of Morocco, while Spain ac- 
Portugal quired many ports in Algeria and Tunisia. Portugal, 
invade the however, suffered a crushing defeat in 1578 at a! Kasr 

states* aI Kebir > the Moors bein g led bv Abd el Malek I. of 
the then recently established Sharifan dynasty. By that 
time the Spaniards had lost almost all their African possessions. 
The Barbary states, primarily from the example of the Moors 
expelled from Spain, degenerated into, mere communities of 
pirates, and under Turkish influence civilization and commerce 
declined. The story of these states from the beginning of the 
16th century to the third decade of the 19th century is largely 
made up of piratical exploits on the one hand and of ineffectual 
reprisals on the other. In Algiers, Tunis and other cities were 
thousands of Christian slaves. 

But with the battle of Ceuta Africa had ceased to belong solely 
to the Mediterranean world. Among those who fought there was 
one, Prince Henry " the Navigator," son of King 
ofthe"* J onn !•) w h° was nred 'with the ambition to acquire 
Guinea for Portugal the unknown parts of Africa. Under his 
Coast— inspiration and direction was begun that series of 
Rise of voyages of exploration which resulted in the circum- 
trade. navigation of Africa and the establishment of Portu- 

guese sovereignty over large areas of the coast-lands. 
Cape Bojador was doubled in 1434, Cape Verde in 1445, and by 
1480 the whole Guinea coast was known. In 1482 Diogo Cam 
or Cao discovered the mouth of the Congo, the Cape of Good 
Hope was doubled by Bartholomew Diaz in 1488, and in 1498 
Vasco da Gama, after having rounded the Cape, sailed up the east 
coast, touched at Sofala and Malindi, and went thence to India. 
Over all the countries discovered by their navigators Portugal 
claimed sovereign rights, but these were not exercised in the ex- 
treme south of the continent. The Guinea coast, as the first dis- 
covered and the nearest to Europe, was first exploited. Numerous 
forts and trading stations were established, the earliest being Sao 
Jorge da Mina (Elmina), begun in 1482. The chief commodities 
dealt in were slaves, gold, ivory and spices. The discovery of 
America (1492) was followed by a great development of the slave 
trade, which, before the Portuguese era, had been an overland 
trade almost exclusively confined to Mahommedan Africa. The 
lucrative nature of this trade and the large quantities of alluvial 
gold obtained by the Portuguese drew other nations to the Guinea 
coast. English mariners went thitheras early as 1553, and they 
were followed by Spaniards, Dutch, French, Danish and other 
adventurers. Much of Senegambia was made known as a result 
of quests during the 16th century for the " hills of gold " in 
Bambuk and the fabled wealth of Timbuktu, but the middle 
Niger was not reached. The supremacy along the coast passed in 
the 17th century from Portugal to Holland and from Holland 
in the 18th and 19th centuries to France and England. The 
whole coast from Senegal to Lagos was dotted with forts and 
" factories " of rival powers, and this international patchwork 
persists though all the hinterland has become either French or 
British territory. 

Southward from the mouth of the Congo 1 to the inhospit- 
able region of Damaraland, the Portuguese, from 1491 onward, 
acquired influence over the Bantu-Negro inhabitants, and in the 
early part of the 16th century through their efforts Christianity 
was largely adopted in the native kingdom of Congo. An irrup- 
tion of cannibals from the interior later in the same century broke 
the power of this semi-Christian state, and Portuguese activity 
was transferred to a great extent farther south, Sao Paulo de 
Loanda being founded in 1 576. The sovereignty of Portugal over 
this coast region, except for the mouth of the Congo, has been 
once only challenged by a European power, and that was in 1640- 
1648, when the Dutch held the seaports. 

Neglecting the comparatively poor and thinly inhabited 
regions of South Africa, the Portuguese no sooner discovered 

1 This river was called by the Portuguese the Zaire. They appear 
to have made no attempt to trace its course beyond the rapids which 
stop navigation from the sea. 



than they coveted the flourishing cities held by Arabized peoples 
between Sofala and Cape Guardafui. By 1520 all these Moslem 
sultanates had been seized by Portugal, Mozambique The 
being chosen as the chief city of her East African Portuguese 
possessions. Nor was Portuguese activity confined to '» Bast 
thg coast-lands. The lower and middle Zambezi valley ^^jf 
was explored (16th and 17th centuries), and here the 
Portuguese found semi-civilized Bantu-Negro tribes, who had 
been for many years in contact with the coast Arabs. Strenuous 
efforts were made to obtain possession of the country (modern 
Rhodesia) known to them as the kingdom or empire of Monomo- 
tapa, where gold had been worked by the natives from about the 
12th century a.d., and whence the Arabs, whom the Portuguese 
dispossessed, were still obtaining supplies in the 16th century. 
Several expeditions were despatched inland from 1569 onward 
and considerable quantities of gold were obtained. Portugal's 
hold on the interior, never very effective, weakened during the 
17 th century, and in the middle of the 18th century ceased with 
the abandonment of the forts in the Manica district. 

At the period of her greatest power Portugal exercised a 
strong influence in Abyssinia also. In the ruler of Abyssinia (to 
whose dominions a Portuguese traveller had penetrated before 
Vasco da Gama's memorable voyage) the Portuguese imagined 
they had found the legendary Christian king, Prester John, and 
when the complete overthrow of the native dynasty and the 
Christian religion was imminent by the victories of Mahommedan 
invaders, the exploits of a band of 400 Portuguese under Christo- 
pher da Gama during 1 541-1543 turned the scale in favour of 
Abyssinia and had thus an enduring result on the future of North- 
East Africa. After da Gama's time Portuguese Jesuits resorted 
to Abyssinia. While they failed in their efforts to convert the 
Abyssinians to Roman Catholicism they acquired an extensive 
knowledge of the country. Pedro Paez in 161 5, and, ten years 
later, Jeronimo Lobo, both visited the sources of the Blue Nile. 
In 1663 the Portuguese, who had outstayed their welcome, were 
expelled from the Abyssinian dominions. At this time Portu- 
guese influence on the Zanzibar coast was waning before the 
power of the Arabs of Muscat, and by 1730 no point on the east 
coast north of Cape Delgado was held by Portugal. 

It has been seen that Portugal took no steps to acquire the 
southern part of the continent. To the Portuguese the Cape of 
Good Hope was simply a landmark on the road to 
India, and mariners of other nations who followed in ani Dutch 
their wake used Table Bay only as a convenient spot at Table 
wherein to refit on their voyage to the East. By the Bay—Cape 
beginning of the 17th century the bay was much re- ^ u ° n n J e ^ 
sorted to for this purpose, chiefly by English and Dutch 
vessels. In 1620, with the object of forestalling the Dutch, two 
officers of the East India Company, on their own initiative, 
took possession of Table Bay in the name of King James, fearing 
otherwise that English ships would be " frustrated of watering 
but by license." Their action was not approved in London 
and the proclamation they issued remained without effect. 
The Netherlands profited by the apathy of the English. On the 
advice of sailors who had been shipwrecked in Table Bay the 
Netherlands East India Company, in 1651, sent out a fleet of three 
small vessels under Jan van Riebeek which reached Table Bay on 
the 6th of April 1652, when, 164 years after its discovery, the 
first permanent white settlement was made in South Africa. The 
Portuguese, whose power in Africa was already waning, were not 
in a position to interfere with the Dutch plans, and England was 
content to seize the island of St Helena as her half-way house to 
the East. 2 In its inception the settlement at the Cape was not 
intended to become an African colony, but was regarded as the 
most westerly outpost of the Dutch East Indies. Nevertheless, 
despite the paucity of ports and the absence of navigable rivers, 
the Dutch colonists, freed from any apprehension of European 
trouble by the friendship between Great Britain and Holland, 
and leavened by Huguenot blood, gradually spread northward, 

2 France acquired, as stations for her ships on the voyage to and 
from India, settlements in Madagascar and the neighbouring islands. 
The first settlement was made in 1642. 



HISTORY] 



AFRICA 



333 



stamping their language, law and religion indelibly upon South 
Africa. This process, however, was exceedingly slow. 

During the 18th century there is little to record in the history 
of Africa. The nations of Europe, engaged in the later half of the 
w . century in almost constant warfare, and struggling for 

and supremacy in America and the East, to a large extent 

revival of lost their interest in the continent. Only on the west 
'"'"?*' coast was there keen rivalry, and here the motive was 

the securance of trade rather than territorial acqui- 
sitions. In this century the slave trade reached its highest de- 
velopment, the trade in gold, ivory, gum and spices being small 
in comparison. In the interior of the continent — Portugal's 
energy being expended — no interest was shown, the nations with 
establishments on the coast " taking no further notice of the 
inhabitants or their land than to obtain at the easiest rate what 
they procure with as little trouble as possible, or to carry them off 
for slaves to their plantations in America " {Encyclopaedia Britan- 
nica, 3rded., 1797). Even the scanty knowledge acquired by the 
ancients and the Arabs was in the main forgotten or disbelieved. 
It was the period when — 

Geographers, in Afric maps, 

With savage pictures filled their gaps, 

And o'er unhabitable downs 

Placed elephants for want of towns. 

(Poetry, a Rhapsody. By Jonathan Swift.) 

The prevailing ignorance may be gauged by the statement in the 
third edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica that " the Gambia 
and Senegal rivers are only branches of the Niger." But the 
closing years of the 18th century, which witnessed the partial 
awakening of the public conscience of Europe to the iniquities 
of the slave trade, were also notable for the revival of interest 
in inner Africa. A society, the African Association, 1 was formed 
in London in 1788 for the exploration of the interior of the 
continent. The era of great discoveries had begun a little earlier 
in the famous journey (1770-177 2) of James Bruce through 
Abyssinia and Sennar, during which he determined the course 
of the Blue Nile. But it was through the agents of the African 
Association that knowledge was gained of the Niger regions. 
The Niger itself was first reached by Mungo Park, who travelled 
by way of the Gambia, in 1795. Park, on a second journey in 
1805, passed Timbuktu and descended the Niger to Bussa, where 
he lost his life, having just failed to solve the question as to where 
the river reached the ocean. (This problem was ultimately 
solved by Richard Lander and his brother in 1830.) The first 
scientific explorer of South-East Africa, Dr Francisco de Lacerda, 
a Portuguese, also lost his life in that country. Lacerda travelled 
up the Zambezi to Tete, going thence towards Lake Mweru, near 
which he died in 1 798. The first recorded crossing of Africa was 
accomplished between the years 1802 and 181 1 by two half-caste 
Portuguese traders, Pedro Baptista and A. Jose, who passed from 
Angola eastward to the Zambezi. 

Although the Napoleonic wars distracted the attention of 
Europe from exploratory work in Africa, those wars nevertheless 
_ exercised great influence on the future of the con- 

ofthe tinent, both in Egypt and South Africa. The occupa- 

Napoleonlc tion of Egypt (1798-1803) first by France and then 
r'h'T k y Great Britain resulted in an effort by Turkey to 
seizes the re 8 am direct control over that country, 2 followed in 
Cape. 181 1 by the establishment under Mehemet Ali of an 

almost independent state, and the extension of Egyp- 
tian rule over the eastern Sudan (from 1820 onward). In South 
Africa the struggle with Napoleon caused Great Britain to 
take possession of the Dutch settlements at the Cape, and in 1814 
Cape Colony, which had been continuously occupied by British 
troops since 1806, was formally ceded to the British crown. 

The close of the European conflicts with the battle of Waterloo 
was followed by vigorous efforts on the part of the British govern- 
ment to become better acquainted with Africa, and to substitute 
colonization and legitimate trade for the slave traffic, declared 

1 The Association, in 1831, was merged in the Royal Geographical 
Society. 

2 The Mamelukes, whom the Turks had overthrown in the 16th 
century, had regained practically independent power. 



illegal for British subjects in 1807 and abolished by all other 
European powers by 1836. To West Africa Britain devoted 
much attention. The slave trade abolitionists had already, 
in 1788, formed a, settlement at Sierra Leone, on the Guinea 
coast, for freed slaves, and from this establishment grew the 
colony of Sierra Leone, long notorious, by reason of its deadly 
climate, as " The White Man's Grave." 3 Farther east the 
establishments on the Gold Coast began to take a part in the 
politics of the interior, and the first British mission to Kumasi, 
despatched in 1817, led to the assumption of a protectorate 
over the maritime tribes heretofore governed by the Ashanti. 

An expedition sent in 1816 to explore the Congo from its 
mouth did not succeed in getting beyond the rapids which bar 
the way to the interior, but in the central Sudan much better 
results were obtained. In 1823 three English travellers, Walter 
Oudney, Dixon Denham and Hugh Clapperton, reached Lake 
Chad from Tripoli — the first white men to reach that lake. The 
partial exploration of Bornu and the Hausa states by Clapperton, 
which followed, revealed the existence of large and flourishing 
cities and a semi-civilized people in a region hitherto unknown. 
The discovery in 1830 of the mouth of the Niger by Clapperton's 
servant Lander, already mentioned, had been preceded by the 
journeys of Major A. G. Laing (1826) and Rene Caillie (1827) to 
Timbuktu, and was followed (1832-1833) by the partial ascent of 
the Benue affluent of the Niger by MacGregor Laird. In 1841 
a disastrous attempt was made to plant a white colony on the 
lower Niger, an expedition (largely philanthropic and anti- 
slavery in its inception) which ended in utter failure. Never- 
theless from that time British traders remained on the lower 
Niger, their continued presence leading ultimately to the acquisi- 
tion of political rights over the delta and the Hausa states by 
Great Britain. 4 Another endeavour by the British government 
to open up commercial relations with the Niger countries resulted 
in the addition of a vast amount of information concerning the 
countries between Timbuktu and Lake Chad, owing to the labours 
of Heinrich Barth (1850-1855), originally a subordinate, but the 
only surviving member of the expedition sent out. 

Meantime considerable changes bad been made in other parts 
of the continent, the most notable being — the occupation of 
Algiers by France in 1830, an end being thereby put to the 
piratical proceedings of the Barbary states; the continued 
expansion southward of Egyptian authority with the consequent 
additions to the knowledge of the Nile; and the establishment 
of independent states (Orange Free State and the Transvaal) 
by Dutch farmers (Boers) dissatisfied with British rule in Cape 
Colony. Natal, so named by Vasco da Gama, had been made 
a British colony (1843), the attempt of the Boers to acquire it 
being frustrated. The city of Zanzibar, on the island of that 
name, founded in 1832 by Seyyid Said of Muscat, rapidly attained 
importance, and Arabs began to penetrate to the great lakes ol 
East Africa, 5 concerning which little more was known (and less, 
believed) than in the time of Ptolemy. Accounts of a vast inland 
sea, and the discovery in 1848-1849, by the missionaries Ludwig 
Krapf and J. Rebmann, of the snow-clad mountains of Kili- 
manjaro and Kenya, stimulated in Europe the desire for further 
knowledge. 

At this period, the middle of the 19th century, Protestant 
missions were carrying on active propaganda on the Guinea 
coast, in South Africa and in the Zanzibar dominions. 
Their work, largely beneficent, was being conducted T ^ eera 
in regions and among peoples little known, and in exp / orers . 
many instances missionaries turned explorers and 
became pioneers of trade and empire. One of the first to 
attempt to fill up the remaining blank spaces in the map was 
David Livings tone, who had been engaged since 1840m missionary 
work north of the Orange. In 1849 Livingstone crossed the 
Kalahari Desert from south to north and reached Lake Ngami. 

3 In imitation of the British example, an American society 
founded in 1822 the negro colony (now republic) of Liberia. 

4 The first territorial acquisition made by Great Britain in this 
region was in 1851, when Lagos Island was annexed. 

6 As early as 1848 an Arab from Zanzibar journeying across the 
continent had arrived at Benguella. 



334 



AFRICA 



[HISTORY 



and between 185 1 and 1856 he traversed the continent from 
west to east, making known the great waterways of the upper 
Zambezi. During these journeyings Livingstone discovered, 
November 1855, the famous Victoria Falls, so named after the 
queen of England. In 1858-1864 the lower Zambezi, the Shire 
and Lake Nyasa were explored by Livingstone, Nyasa having 
been first reached by the confidential slave of Antonio da Silva 
Porto, a Portuguese trader established at Bihe in Angola, who 
crossed Africa during 1853-1856 from Benguella to the mouth of 
the Rovuma. While Livingstone circumnavigated Nyasa, the 
more northerly lake, Tanganyika, had been visited (1858) by 
Richard Burton and J. H. Speke, and the last named had sighted 
Victoria Nyanza. Returning to East Africa with J. A. Grant, 
Speke reached, in 1862, the river which flowed from Victoria 
Nyanza, and following it (in the main) down to Egypt, had the 
distinction of being the first man to read the riddle of the Nile. 
In 1864 another Nile explorer, Samuel Baker, discovered the 
Albert Nyanza, the chief western reservoir of the river. In 1866 
Livingstone began his last great journey, in which he made known 
Lakes Mweru and Bangweulu and discovered the Lualaba (the 
upper part of the Congo), but died (1873) before he had been 
able to demonstrate its ultimate course, believing indeed that 
the Lualaba belonged to the Nile system. Livingstone's lonely 
death in the heart of Africa evoked a keener desire than ever 
to complete the work he left undone. H. M. Stanley, who had 
in 1 87 1 succeeded in finding and succouring Livingstone, started 
again for Zanzibar in 1874, and in the most memorable of all 
exploring expeditions in Africa circumnavigated Victoria Nyanza 
and Tanganyika, and, striking farther inland to the Lualaba, 
followed that river down to the Atlantic Ocean — reached in 
August 1877 — and proved it to be the Congo. Stanley had been 
preceded, in 1874, at Nyangwe, Livingstone's farthest point on 
the Lualaba, by Lovett Cameron, who was, however, unable 
farther to explore its course, making his way to the west coast 
by a route south of the Congo. 

While the great mystery of Central Africa was being solved 
explorers were also active in other parts of the continent. 
Southern Morocco, the Sahara and the Sudan were traversed 
in many directions between i860 and 1875 by Gerhard Rohlfs, 
Georg Schweinfurth and Gustav Nachtigal. These travellers 
not only added considerably to geographical knowledge, but 
obtained invaluable information concerning the people, languages 
and natural history of the countries in which they sojourned. 1 
Among the discoveries of Schweinfurth was one that confirmed 
the Greek legends of the existence beyond Egypt of a pygmy 
race. But the first discoverer of the dwarf races of Central 
Africa was Paul du Chaillu, who found them in the Ogowe district 
of the west coast in 1865, five years before Schweinfurth's first 
meeting with the Pygmies; du Chaillu having previously, as 
the result of journeys in the Gabun country between 1855 and 
1859, made popular in Europe the knowledge of the existence 
of the gorilla, perhaps the gigantic ape seen by Hanno the Cartha- 
ginian, and whose existence, up to the middle of the 19th century, 
was thought to be as legendary as that of the Pygmies of Aristotle. 

In South Africa the filling up of the map also proceeded apace. 
The finding, in 1869, of rich diamond fields in the valley of the 
Vaal river, near its confluence with the Orange, caused a rush 
of emigrants to that district, and led to conflicts between the 
Dutch and British authorities and the extension of British 
authority northward. In 1871 the ruins of the great Zimbabwe 
in Mashonaland, the chief fortress and distributing centre of 
the race which in medieval times worked the goldfields of South- 
East Africa, were explored by Karl Mauch. In the following 
year F. C. Selous began his journeys over South Central Africa, 
which continued for more than twenty years and extended over 
every part of Mashonaland and Matabeleland. (F. R. C.) 

V. Partition among European Powers 

In the last quarter of the 19th century the map of Africa was 
transformed. After the discovery of the Congo the story of 

1 Another great traveller of this stamp was Wilhelm Junker, who 
spent the greaterpartof the period i875-i886inthe east centralSudan. 



exploration takes second place; the continent becomes the 
theatre of European expansion. Lines of partition, drawn often 
through trackless wildernesses, marked out the possessions of 
Germany, France, Great Britain and other powers. Railways 
penetrated the interior, vast areas were opened up to civilized 
occupation, and from ancient Egypt to the Zambezi the continent 
was startled into new life. 

Before 1875 the only powers with any considerable interest 
in Africa were Britain, "Portugal and France. Between 1815 
and 1850, as has been shown above, the British government 
devoted much energy, not always informed by knowledge, 'to 
western and southern Africa. In both directions Great Britain 
had met with much discouragement; on the west coast, disease, 
death, decaying trade and useless conflicts with savage foes 
had been the normal experience; in the south recalcitrant 
Boers and hostile Kaffirs caused almost endless trouble. The 
visions once entertained of vigorous negro Communities at once 
civilized and Christian faded away; to the hot fit of philan- 
thropy succeeded the cold fit of indifference and a disinclination 
to bear the burden of empire. The low-water mark of British 
interest in South Africa was reached in 1854 when independence 
was forced on the Orange River Boers, while in 1865 the mind 
of the nation was fairly reflected by the unanimous resolution 
of a representative House of Commons committee: 2 "that all 
further extension of territory or assumption of government, or 
new treaty offering any protection to native tribes, would be 
inexpedient." For nearly twenty years the spirit of that resolu- 
tion paralysed British action in Africa, although many circum- 
stances — the absence of any serious European rival, the in- 
evitable border disputes with uncivilized races, and the activity 
of missionary and trader — conspired to make British influence 
dominant in large areas of the continent over which the govern- 
ment exercised no definite authority. The freedom with which 
blood and treasure were spent to enforce respect for the British 
flag or to succour British subjects in distress, as in the Abyssinian 
campaign of 1867-68 and the Ashanti war of 1873, tended further 
to enhance the reputation of Great Britain among African races, 
while, as an inevitable result of the possession of India, British 
officials exercised considerable power at the court of Zanzibar, 
which indeed owed its separate existence to a decision of Lord 
Canning, the governor-general of India, in 1861 recognizing the 
division of the Arabian and African dominions of the imam of 
Muscat. 

It has been said that Great Britain was without serious rival. 
On the Gold Coast she had bought the Danish forts in 1850 and 
acquired the Dutch, 1871-1872, in exchange for establishments in 
Sumatra. But Portugal still held, both in the east and west 
of Africa, considerable stretches of the tropical coast-lands, and 
it was in 1875 that she obtained, as a result of the arbitration 
of Marshal MacMahon, possession of the whole of Delagoa Bay, 
to the southern part of which England also laid claim by virtue 
of a treaty of cession concluded with native chiefs in 1823. The 
only other European power which at the period under considera- 
tion had considerable possessions in Africa was France. Besides 
Algeria, France had settlements on the Senegal, where in 1854 
the appointment of General Faidherbe as governor marked the 
beginning of a policy of expansion; she had also various posts 
on the upper Guinea coast, had taken the estuary of the Gabun 
as a station for her navy, and had acquired (1862) Obok at the 
southern entrance to the Red Sea. 

In North Africa the Turks had (in 1835) assumed direct 
control of Tripoli, while Morocco had fallen into a state of decay 
though retaining its independence. The most remarkable 
change was in Egypt, where the Khedive Ismail had introduced 
a somewhat fantastic imitation of European civilization. In 
addition Ismail had conquered Darfur, annexed Harrar and the 
Somali ports on the Gulf of Aden, was extending his power 
southward to the equatorial lakes, and even contemplated reach- 
ing the Indian Ocean. The Suez Canal, opened in 1869, had a 
great influence on the future of Africa, as it again made Egypt 
the highway to the East, to the detriment of the Cape route. 
2 Specially appointed to consider West African affairs. 



HISTORY] 



AFRICA 



33.5 



Any estimate of the area of African territory held by European 
nations in 1875 is necessarily but approximate, and varies chiefly 
The divi- as tne com Piler of statistics rejects or accepts the 
sioaoftbe vague claims of Portugal to sovereignty over the 
continent hinterland of her coast possessions. At that period 
in 1875. other European nations — with the occasional excep- 
tion of Great Britain — were indifferent to Portugal's preten- 
sions, and her estimate of her African empire as covering 
over 700,000 sq. m. was not challenged. 1 But the area under 
effective control of Portugal at that time did not exceed 40,000 
sq. m. Great Britain then held some 250,000 sq. m., France 
about 170,000 sq. m. and Spain 1000 sq. m. The area of the 
independent Dutch republics (the Transvaal and Orange Free 
State) was some 150,000 sq. m., so that the total area of Africa 
ruled by Europeans did not exceed 1,271,000 sq. m.; roughly 
one-tenth of the continent. This estimate, as it admits the full 
extent of Portuguese claims and does not include Madagascar, 
in reality considerably overstates the case. 

Egypt and the Egyptian Sudan, Tunisia and Tripoli were 
subject in differing ways to the overlordship of the sultan of 
Turkey, and with these may be ranked, in the scale of organized 
governments, the three principal independent states, Morocco, 
Abyssinia and Zanzibar, as also the negro republic of Liberia. 
There remained, apart from the Sahara, roughly one half of 
Africa, lying mostly within the tropics, inhabited by a multitude 
of tribes and peoples living under various forms of govern- 
ment and subject to frequent changes in respect of political 
organization. In this region were the negro states of Ashanti, 
Dahomey and Benin on the west coast, the Mahommedan 
sultanates of the central Sudan, and a number of negro kingdoms 
in the east central and south central regions. Of these Uganda 
on the north-west shores of Victoria Nyanza, Cazembe and 
Muata Hianvo (or Yanvo) may be mentioned. The two last- 
named kingdoms occupied respectively the south-eastern and 
south-western parts of the Congo basin. In all this vast region 
the Negro and Negro-Bantu races predominated, for the most 
part untouched by Mahommedanism or Christian influences. 
They lacked political cohesion, and possessed neither the means 
nor the inclination to extend their influence beyond their own 
borders. The exploitation of Africa continued to be entirely 
the work of alien races. 

The causes which led to the partition of Africa may now be 
considered. They are to be found in the economic and political 
Causes state of western Europe at the time. Germany, 
which led strong and united as the result of the Franco-Prussian 
to par- War of 1870, was seeking new outlets for her energies 
Mioa - — new markets for her growing industries, and with 

the markets, colonies. Yet the idea of colonial expansion was 
of slow growth in Germany, and when Prince Bismarck at length 
acted Africa was the only field left to exploit, South America 
being protected from interference by the known determination 
of the United States to enforce the Monroe Doctrine, while 
Great Britain, France, the Netherlands, Portugal and Spain 
already held most of the other regions of the world where coloniza- 
tion was possible. For different reasons the war of 1870 was 
also the starting-point for France in the building up of a new 
colonial empire. In her endeavour to regain the position lost 
in that war France had to look beyond Europe. To the two 
causes mentioned must be added others. Great Britain and 
Portugal, when they found their interests threatened, bestirred 
themselves, while Italy also conceived it necessary to become 
an African power. Great Britain awoke to the need for action 
too late to secure predominance in all the regions where formerly 
hers was the only European influence. She had to contend not 
only with the economic forces which urged her rivals to action, 
but had also to combat the jealous opposition of almost every 
European nation to the further growth of British power. Italy 
alone acted throughout in cordial co-operation with Great 
Britain. 

It was not, however, the action of any of the great powers 

1 See the tables in Behm and Wagner's Bevolkerune der Erie 
(Gotha, 1872). 



of Europe which precipitated the struggle. This was brought 
about by the ambitious projects of Leopold II., king of the 
Belgians. The discoveries of Livingstone, Stanley and others 
had aroused especial interest among two classes of men in 
western Europe, one the manufacturing and trading class, 
which saw in Central Africa possibilities of commercial develop- 
ment, the other the philanthropic and missionary class, which 
beheld in the newly discovered lands millions of savages to 
Christianize and civilize. The possibility of utilizing both these 
classes in the creation of a vast state, of which he should be the 
chief, formed itself in the mind of Leopold II. even before Stanley 
had navigated the Congo. The king's action was immediate; it 
proved successful; but no sooner was the nature of his project 
understood in Europe than it provoked the rivalry of France 
and Germany, and thus the international struggle was begun. 




EmtryWallMf SC 



At this point it is expedient, in the light of subsequent events, 
to set forth the designs then entertained by the European powers 
that participated in the struggle for Africa. Portugal 
was striving to retain as large a share as possible of lng ambl . 
her shadowy empire, and particularly to establish her tions of 
claims to the Zambezi region, so as to secure a belt of *^ e 
territory across Africa from Mozambique to Angola. 



European 
powers. 



Great Britain, once aroused to the imminence of danger, 
put forth vigorous efforts in East Africa and on the Niger, but 
her most ambitious dream was the establishment of an unbroken 
line of British possessions and spheres of influence from south to 
north of the continent, from Cape Colony to Egypt. Germany's 
ambition can be easily described. It was to secure as much as 
possible, so as to make up for lost opportunities. Italy coveted 
Tripoli, but that province could not be seized without risking 
war. For the rest Italy's territorial ambitions were confined 
to North-East Africa, where she hoped to acquire a dominating 
influence over Abyssinia. French ambitions, apart from Mada- 
gascar, were confined to. the northern and central portions of 
the continent. To extend her possessions on the Mediterranean 
littoral, and to connect them with her colonies in West Africa, 
the western Sudan, and on the Congo, by establishing her in- 
fluence over the vast intermediate regions, was France's first 
ambition. But the defeat of the Italians in Abyssinia and the 
impending downfall of the khalifa's power in the valley of the: 
upper Nile suggested a still more daring project to the French 
government — none other than the establishment of French< 



336 



AFRICA 



[HISTORY 



influence over a broad belt of territory stretching across the 
continent from west to east, from Senegal on the Atlantic coast 
to the Gulf of Aden. The fact that France possessed a small 
part of the Red Sea coast gave point to this design. But these 
conflicting ambitions could not all be realized, and Germany 
succeeded in preventing Great Britain obtaining a continuous 
band of British territory from south to north, while Great Britain, 
by excluding France from the upper Nile valley, dispelled the 
French dream of an empire from west to east. 

King Leopold's ambitions have already been indicated. The 
part of the continent to which from the first he directed his 
energies was the equatorial region. In September 1876 he took 
what may be described as the first definite step in the modern 
partition of the continent. He summoned to a conference 
at Brussels representatives of Great Britain, Belgium, France, 
Germany, Austria-Hungary, Italy and Russia, to deliberate 
on the best methods to be adopted for the exploration and 
civilization of Africa, and the opening up of the interior of the 
continent to commerce and industry. The conference was 
entirely unofficial. The delegates who attended neither repre- 
sented nor pledged their respective governments. Their 
deliberations lasted three days and resulted in the foundation 
of " The International African Association," • with its head- 
quarters at Brussels. It was further resolved to establish 
national committees in the various countries represented, which 
should collect funds and appoint delegates to the International 
Association. The central idea appears to have been to put the 
exploration and development of Africa upon an international 
footing. But it quickly became apparent that this was an 
unattainable ideal. The national committees were soon working 
independently of the International Association, and the Associa- 
tion itself passed through a succession of stages until it became 
purely Belgian in character, and at last developed into the Congo 
Free State, under the personal sovereignty of King Leopold. 
At first the Association devoted itself to sending expeditions 
to the great central lakes from the east coast; but failure, more 
or less complete, attended its efforts in this direction, and it 
was not until the return of Stanley, in January 1878, from his 
great journey down the Congo, that its ruling spirit, King 
Leopold, definitely turned his thoughts towards the Congo. In 
June of that year, Stanley visited the king at Brussels, and in 
the following November a private conference was held, and a 
committee was appointed for the investigation of the upper 
Congo. 

Stanley's remarkable discovery had stirred ambition in other 
capitals than Brussels. France had always taken a keen interest 
The in West Africa, and in the years 1875 to 1878 Savorgnan 

struggle de Brazza had carried out a successful exploration of 
the Ogowe river to the south of the Gabun. De Brazza 
determined that the Ogowe did not offer that great 
waterway into the interior of which he was in search, and he 
returned to Europe without having heard of the discoveries 
of Stanley farther south. Naturally, however, Stanley's dis- 
coveries were keenly followed in France. In Portugal, too, the 
discovery of the Congo, with its magnificent unbroken waterway 
of more than a thousand miles into the heart of the continent, 
served to revive the languid energies of the Portuguese, who 
promptly began to furbish up claims whose age was in inverse 
ratio to their validity. Claims, annexations and occupations 
were in the air, and when in January 1879 Stanley left Europe 
as the accredited agent of King Leopold and the Congo com- 
mittee, the strictest secrecy was observed as to his real aims and 
intentions. The expedition was, it was alleged, proceeding up 
the Congo to assist the Belgian expedition which had entered 
from the east coast, and Stanley himself went first to Zanzibar. 
But in August 1879 Stanley found himself again at Banana 
Point, at the mouth of the Congo, with, as he himself has written, 
" the novel mission of sowing along its banks civilized settlements 
to peacefully conquer and subdue it, to remould it in harmony 
with modern ideas into national states, within whose limits the 
European merchant shall go hand in hand with the dark African 
trader, and justice and law and order shall prevail, and murder 



for the 
Congo, 



and lawlessness and the cruel barter of slaves shall be overcome." 
The irony of human aspirations was never perhaps more plainly 
demonstrated than in the contrast between the ideal thus set 
before themselves by those who employed Stanley, and the actual 
results of their intervention in Africa. Stanley founded his first 
station at Vivi, between the mouth of the Congo and the rapids 
that obstruct its course where it breaks over the western edge 
of the central continental plateau. Above the rapids he estab- 
lished a station on Stanley Pool and named it Leopoldville, 
founding other stations on the main stream in the direction of 
the falls that bear his name! 

Meanwhile de Brazza was far from idle. He had returned to 
Africa at the beginning of 1880, and while the agents of King 
Leopold were making treaties and founding stations along the 
southern bank of the river, de Brazza and other French agents 
were equally busy on the northern bank. De Brazza was sent 
out to Africa by the French committee of the International 
African Association, which provided him with the funds for the 
expedition. His avowed object was to explore the region 
between the Gabun and Lake Chad. But his real object was to 
anticipate Stanley on the Congo. The international character of 
the association founded by King Leopold was never more than 
a polite fiction, and the rivalry between the French and the 
Belgians on the Congo was soon open, if not avowed. In October 
1880 de Brazza made a solemn treaty with a chief on the north 
bank of the Congo, who claimed that his authority extended 
over a large area, including territory on the southern bank of 
the river. As soon as this chief had accepted French protection, 
de Brazza crossed over to the south of the river, and founded 
a station close to the present site of Leopoldville. The discovery 
by Stanley of the French station annoyed King Leopold's agent, 
and he promptly challenged the rights of the chief who purported 
to have placed the country under French protection, and him- 
self founded a Belgian station close to the site selected by 
de Brazza. In the result, the French station was withdrawn 
to the northern side of Stanley Pool, where it is now known 
as Brazzaville. 

The activity of French and Belgian agents on the Congo had 
not passed unnoticed in Lisbon, and the Portuguese government 
saw that no time was to be lost if the claims it had never ceased 
to put forward on the west coast were not to go by default. 
At varying periods during the 19th century Portugal had put 
forward claims to the whole of the West African coast, between 
5° 12' and 8° south. North of the Congo mouth she claimed the 
territories of Kabinda and Molemba, alleging that they had been 
in her possession since 1484. Great Britain had never, however, 
admitted this claim, and south of the Congo had declined to 
recognize Portuguese possessions as extending north of Ambriz. 
In 1856 orders were given to British cruisers to prevent by force 
any attempt to extend Portuguese dominion north of that place. 
But the Portuguese had been persistent in urging their claims, 
and in 1882 negotiations were again opened with the British 
government for recognition of Portuguese rights over both 
banks of the Congo on the coast, and for some distance inland. 
Into the details of the negotiations, which were conducted for 
Great Britain by the 2nd Earl Granville, who was then secretary 
for foreign affairs, it is unnecessary to enter; they resulted 
in the signing on the 26th of February 1884 of a treaty, by which 
Great Britain recognized the sovereignty of the king of Portugal 
" over that part of the west coast of Africa, situated between 
8° and 5° 12' south latitude," and inland as far as Noki, on the 
south bank of the Congo, below Vivi. The navigation of the 
Congo was to be controlled by an Anglo-Portuguese commission. 
The publication of this treaty evoked immediate protests, not 
only on the continent but in Great Britain. In face of the 
disapproval aroused by the treaty, Lord Granville found himself 
unable to ratify it. The protests had not been confined to France 
and the king of the Belgians. Germany had not yet acquired 
formal footing in Africa, but she was crouching for the spring 
prior to taking her part in the scramble, and Prince Bismarck 
had expressed, in vigorous language, the objections entertained 
by Germany to the Anglo-Portuguese treaty. 



HISTORY] 



AFRICA 



337 



South 
Africa. 



For some time before 1884 there had been growing up a general 
conviction that it would be desirable for the powers who were 
interesting themselves in Africa to come to some agreement 
as to " the rules of the game," and to define their respective 
interests so far as that was practicable. Lord Granville's ill- 
fated treaty brought this sentiment to a head, and it was agreed 
to hold an international conference on African affairs. But 
before discussing the Berlin conference of 1884-1885, it will be 
well to see what was the position, on the eve of the conference, 
in other parts of the African continent. In the southern section 
of Africa, south of the Zambezi, important events had been 
happening. In 1876 Great Britain had concluded an agreement 
with the Orange Free State for an adjustment of 
influence frontiers, the result of which was to leave the Kimberley 
consoH- diamond fields in British territory, in exchange for 
dated fa a payment of £90,000 to the Orange Free State. On 
the 1 2th of April 1877 Sir Theophilus Shepstone had 
issued a proclamation declaring the Transvaal — the 
South African Republic, as it was officially designated — to be 
British territory (see Transvaal). In December 1880 war 
broke out and lasted until March 1881, when a treaty of peace 
was signed. This treaty of peace was followed by a convention, 
signed in August of the same year, under which complete self- 
government was guaranteed to the inhabitants of the Transvaal, 
subject to the suzerainty of Great Britain, upon certain terms 
and conditions and subject to certain reservations and limitations. 
No sooner was the convention signed than it became the object 
of the Boers to obtain a modification of the conditions and limita- 
tions imposed, and in February 1884 a fresh convention was 
signed, amending the convention of 1881. Article IV. of the new 
convention provided that " The South African Republic will 
conclude no treaty or engagement with any state or nation 
other than the Orange Free State, nor with any native tribe to 
the eastward or westward of the Republic, until the same has 
been approved by Her Majesty the Queen." The precise effect 
of the two conventions has been the occasion for interminable 
discussions, but as the subject is now one of merely academic 
interest, it is sufficient to, say that when the Berlin conference 
held its first meeting in 1884 the Transvaal was practically 
independent, so far as its internal administration was con- 
cerned, while its foreign relations were subject to the control 
just quoted. 

But although the Transvaal had thus, between the years 1875 
and 1884, become and ceased to be British territory, British 
influence in other parts of Africa south of the Zambezi had 
been steadily extended. To the west of the Orange Free State, 
Griqualand West was annexed to the Cape in 1880, while to the 
east the territories beyond the Kei river were included in Cape 
Colony between 1877 and 1884, so that in the latter year, with 
the exception of Pondoland, the whole of South-East Africa was 
in one form or another under British control. North of Natal, 
Zululand was not actually annexed until 1887, although since 
1879, when the military power of the Zulus was broken up, 
British influence had been admittedly supreme. In December 
18S4 St Lucia Bay — upon which Germany was casting covetous 
eyes — had been taken possession of in virtue of its cession to 
Great Britain by the Zulu king in 1843, and three years later 
an agreement of non-cession to foreign powers made by Great 
Britain with ths regent and paramount chief of Tongaland 
completed the chain of British possessions on the coast of South 
Africa, from the mouth of the Orange river on the west to Kosi 
Bay and the Portuguese frontier on the east. In the interior 
of South Africa the year 1884 witnessed the beginning of that 
final stage of the British advance towards the north which was 
to extend British influence from the Cape to the southern shores 
of Lake Tanganyika. The activity of the Germans on the west, 
and of the Boer republic on the east, had brought home to both 
the imperial and colonial authorities the impossibility of relying 
on vague traditional claims. In May 18S4 treaties were made 
with native chiefs by which the whole of the country north 
of Cape Colony, west of the Transraal, south of 22° S. and 
east of 20° E., was placed under British protection, though 



a protectorate was not formally declared until the following 
January. 

Meanwhile some very interesting events had been taking place 
or the west coast, north of the Orange river and south of the 
Portuguese province of Mossamedes. It must be sufficient here 
to touch very briefly on the events that preceded the foundation 
of the colony of German South- West Africa. For many years 
before 1884 German missionaries had settled among the Damaras 
(Herero) and Namaquas, often combining small trading opera- 
tions with their missionary work. From time to time trouble 
arose between the missionaries and the native chiefs, and appeals 
were made to the German government for protection. 
The German government in its turn begged the British ^^"^ 
government to say whether it assumed responsibility fleW- 
for the protection of Europeans in Damaraland and 
Namaqualand. The position of the British government was 
intelligible, if not very intelligent. It did not desire to see any 
other European power in these countries, and it did not want to 
assume the responsibility and incur the expense of protecting the 
few Europeans settled there. Sir Bartle Frere, when governor of 
the Cape (18 7 7-1880), had foreseen that this attitude portended 
trouble, and had urged that the whole of the unoccupied coast- 
line, up to the Portuguese frontier, should be declared under 
British protection. But he preached to deaf ears, and it was as 
something of a concession to him that in March 1878 the British 
flag was hoisted at Walfish Bay, and a small part of the adjacent 
land declared to be British. The fact appears to be that British 
statesmen failed to understand the change that had come over 
Germany. They believed that Prince Bismarck would never 
give his sanction to the creation of a colonial empire, and, to the 
German inquiries as to what rights Great Britain claimed in 
Damaraland and Namaqualand, procrastinating replies were 
sent. Meanwhile the various colonial societies established in 
Germany had effected a revolution in public opinion, and, more 
important still, they had convinced the great chancellor. 
Accordingly when, in November 1882, F. A. E. Liideritz, a 
Bremen merchant, informed the German government of his 
intention to establish a factory on the coast between the Orange 
river and the Little Fish river, and asked if he might rely on the 
protection of his government in case of need, he met with no 
discouragement from Prince Bismarck. In February 1883 the 
German ambassador in London informed Lord Granville of 
Liideritz's design, and asked " whether Her Majesty's government 
exercise any authority in that locality." It was intimated that 
if Her Majesty's government did not, the German government 
would extend to Luderitz's factory " the same measure of pro- 
tection which they give to their subjects in remote parts of the 
world, but without having the least design to establish any foot- 
ing in South Africa." An inconclusive reply was sent, and on 
the 9th of April Luderitz's agent landed at Angra Pequefia, and 
after a short delay concluded a treaty with the local chief, by 
which some 215 square miles around Angra Pequefia were ceded 
to Liideritz. In England and at the Cape irritation at the news 
was mingled with incredulity, and it was fully anticipated that 
Liideritz would be disavowed by his government. But for this 
belief it can scarcely be doubted that the rest of the unoccupied 
coast-line would have been promptly declared under British 
protection. Still Prince Bismarck was slow to act. In November 
the German ambassador again inquired if Great Britain made 
any claim over this coast, and Lord Granville replied that Her 
Majesty exercised sovereignty only over certain parts of the 
coast, as at Walfish Bay, and suggested that arrangements might 
be made by which Germany might assist in the settlement of 
Angra Pequefia. By this time Liideritz had extended his acquisi- 
tions southwards to the Orange river, which had been declared 
by the British government to be the northern frontier of Cape 
Colony. Both at the Cape and in England it was now realized 
that Germany had broken away from her former purely con- 
tinental policy, and, when too late, the Cape parliament showed 
great eagerness to acquire the territory which had lain so long at 
its very doors, to be had for the taking. It is not necessary to 
follow the course of the subsequent negotiations. On the 15th 



338 



AFRICA 



[HISTORY 



West 
Africa. 



of August 1884 an official note was addressed by the German 
consul at Capetown to the high commissioner, intimating that 
the German emperor had by proclamation taken " the territory 
belonging to Mr A. Luderitz on the west coast of Africa under the 
direct protection of His Majesty." This proclamation covered 
the coast-line from the north bank of the Orange river to 26° S. 
latitude, and 20 geographical miles inland, including " the 
islands belonging thereto by the law of nations." On the 8th 
of September 1884 the German government intimated to Her 
Majesty's government " that the west coast of Africa from 26 
S. latitude to Cape Frio, excepting Walfish Bay, had been placed 
under the protection of the German emperor." Thus, before the 
end of the year 1884, the foundations of Germany's colonial 
empire had been laid in South- West Africa. 

In April of that year Prince Bismarck intimated to the British 
government, through the German charge d'affaires in London, 
Nachtigai's that " the imperial consul-general, Dr Nachtigal, has 
mission to been commissioned by my government to visit the west 
coast of Africa in the course of the next few months, 
in order to complete the information now in the posses- 
sion of the Foreign Office at Berlin, on the state of German com- 
merce on that coast. With this object Dr Nachtigal will shortly 
embark at Lisbon, on board the gunboat ' Mowe.' He will put 
himself into communication with the authorities in the British 
possessions on the said coast, and is authorized to conduct, on 
behalf of the imperial government, negotiations connected with 
certain questions. I venture," the official communication proceeds, 
" in accordance with my instructions, to beg your excellency to be 
so good as to cause the authorities in the British possessions in 
West Africa to be furnished with suitable recommendations." 
Although at the date of this communication it must have been 
apparent, from what was happening in South Africa, that 
Germany was prepared to enter on a policy of colonial expansion, 
and although the wording of the letter was studiously vague, it 
does not seem to have occurred to the British government that 
the real object of Gustav Nachtigai's journey was to make other 
annexations on the west coast. Yet such was indeed his mission. 
German traders and missionaries had been particularly active of 
late years on the coast of the Gulf of Guinea. German factories 
were dotted all along the coast in districts under British'protec- 
tion, under French protection and under the definite protection 
of no European power at all. It was to these latter places that 
Nachtigal turned his attention. The net result of his operations 
was that on the 5 th of July 1884 a treaty was signed with the 
king of Togo, placing his country under German protection, and 
that just one week later a German protectorate was proclaimed 
over the Cameroon district. Before either of these events had 
occurred Great Britain had become alive to the fact that she could 
no longer dally with the subject, if she desired to consolidate her 
possessions in West Africa. The British government had again 
and again refused to accord native chiefs the protection they 
demanded. The Cameroon chiefs had several times asked for 
British protection, and always in vain. But at last it became 
apparent, even to the official mind, that rapid changes were being 
effected in Africa, and on the 16th of May Edward Hyde Hewett, 
British consul, received instructions to return to the west coast 
and to make arrangements for extending British protection over 
certain regions. He arrived too late to save either Togoland or 
Cameroon, in the latter case arriving five days after King Bell and 
the other chiefs on the river had signed treaties with Nachtigal. 
But the British consul was in time to secure the delta of the river 
Niger and the Oil Rivers District, extending from Rio del Rey 
to the Lagos frontier, where for a long period British traders 
had held almost a monopoly of the trade. 

Meanwhile France, too, had been busy treaty-making. While 
the British government still remained under the spell of the 
Preach and ^^ resolution of 1865, the French government was 
British strenuously endeavouring to extend France's influence 
rivalry la i n West Africa, in the countries lying behind the coast- 
AMca ^ ne ' -During the year 1884 no fewer than forty-two 
treaties were concluded with native chiefs, an even 
larger number having been concluded in the previous twelve 



months. In this fashion France was pushing on towards 
Timbuktu, in steady pursuance of the policy which resulted in 
surrounding all the old British possessions in West Africa with 
a continuous band of French territory. There was, however, 
one region on the west coast where, notwithstanding the lethargy 
of the British government, British interests were being vigorously 
pushed, protected and consolidated. . This was on the lower 
Niger, and the leading spirit in the enterprise was Mr Goldie 
Taubman (afterwards Sir George Taubman Goldie). In 1877 
Sir George Goldie visited the Niger and conceived the idea of 
establishing a settled government in that region. Through 
his efforts the various trading firms en the lower Niger formed 
themselves in 1879 into the " United African Company," and 
the foundations were laid of something like settled administra- 
tion. An application was made to the British government for a 
charter in 1881, and the capital of the company increased to a 
million sterling. Henceforth the company was known as the 
" National African Company," and it was acknowledged that 
its object was not only to develop the trade of the lower Niger, 
but to extend its operations to the middle reaches of the river, 
and to open up direct relations with the great Fula empire of 
Sokoto and the smaller states associated with Sokoto under a 
somewhat loosely defined suzerainty. The great development 
of trade which followed the combination of British interests 
carried out under Goldie's skilful guidance did not pass unnoticed 
in France, and, encouraged by Gambetta, French traders made a 
bold bid for a position on the river. Two French companies, 
with ample capital, were formed, and various stations were 
established on the lower Niger. Goldie realized at once the 
seriousness of the situation, and lost no time in declaring com- 
mercial war on the newcomers. His bold tactics were entirely 
successful, and a few days before the meeting of the Berlin 
conference he had the satisfaction of announcing that he had 
bought out the whole of the French interests on the river, and 
that Great Britain alone possessed any interests on the lower 
Niger. 

To complete the survey of the political situation in Africa at 
the time the plenipotentiaries met at Berlin, it is necessary to 
refer briefly to the course of events in North and East jheposi- 
Africa since 1875. In 1881 a French army entered Hon in 
Tunisia, and compelled the bey to sign a treaty placing ' ru " 1 ^ ,a 
that country under French protection. The sultan of 
Turkey formally protested against this invasion of Ottoman 
rights, but the great powers took no action, and France was 
left in undisturbed possession of her newly acquired territory. 
In Egypt the extravagance of Ismail Pasha had led to .he 
establishment in 1879, in the interests of European bond- 
holders, of a Dual Control exercised by France and Great Britain. 
France had, however, in 1882 refused to take part in the suppres- 
sion of a revolt under Arabi Pasha, which England accomplished 
unaided. As a consequence the Dual Control had been abolished 
in January 1883, since when Great Britain, with an army 
quartered in the country, had assumed a predominant position 
in Egyptian affairs (see Egypt). In East Africa, north of the 
Portuguese possessions, where the sultan of Zanzibar was the 
most considerable native potentate, Germany was secretly 
preparing the foundations of her present colony of German 
East Africa. But no overt act had warned Europe of what 
was impending. The story of the foundation of German East 
Africa is one of the romances of the continent. Early in 1884 
the Society for German Colonization was founded, with the 
avowed object of furthering the newly awakened colonial 
aspirations of the German people. 1 It was a society inspired 
and controlled by young men, and on the 4th of November 1884, 
eleven days before the conference assembled at Berlin, three 
young Germans arrived as deck passengers at Zanzibar. They 
were disguised as mechanics, but were in fact Dr Karl Peters, 
the president of the Colonization Society, Joachim Count Pfeil, 
and Dr Jiihlke, and their stock-in-trade consisted of a number 

1 In 1887 this society united with the German Colonial Society, 
an organization founded in 1882. The united society took the title 
of the German Colonial Company. 



HISTORY] 



AFRICA 



339 



Associa- 
tion. 



of German flags and a supply of blank treaty forms. They 
proposed to land on the mainland opposite Zanzibar, and 
The to conclude treaties in the back country with native 

German chiefs placing their territories under German pro- 
nag raised tection. The enterprise was frowned upon by the 
'?^? st German government; but, encouraged by German 
residents at Zanzibar, the three young pioneers crossed 
to the mainland, and on the 19th of November, while the diplo- 
matists assembled at Berlin were solemnly discussing the rules 
which were to govern the game of partition, the first " treaty " 
was signed at Mbuzini, and the German flag raised for the first 
time in East Africa. 

Italy had also obtained a footing on the African continent 
before the meeting of the Berlin conference. The Rubattino 
Steamship Company as far back as 1870 had bought the port of 
Assab as a coaling station, but it was not until 1882 that it was 
declared an Italian colony. This was followed by the conclusion 
of a treaty with the sultan of Assab, chief of the Danakil, signed 
on the 15th of March 1883, and subsequently approved by the 
king of Shoa, whereby Italy obtained the cession of part of Ablis 
(Aussa) on the Red Sea, Italy undertaking to protect with her 
fleet the Danakil littoral. 

One other event must be recorded as happening before the 

meeting of the Berlin conference. The king of the Belgians had 

been driven to the conclusion that, if his African 
Recogal- > . . . , 

tioaoftbe enterprise was to obtain any measure of permanent 

inter- success, its international status must be recognized. 

national <p tn j s en( j negotiations were opened with various 
governments. The first government to " recognize 
the flag of the International Association of the Congo 
as the flag of a friendly government " was that of the United 
States, its declaration to that effect bearing date the 22nd of 
April 1884. There were, however, difficulties in the way of 
obtaining the recognition of the European powers, and in order 
to obtain that of France, King Leopold, on the 23rd of April 
1884, while labouring under the feelings of annoyance which 
had been aroused by the Anglo-Portuguese treaty concluded by 
Lord Granville in February, authorized Colonel Strauch, presi- 
dent of the International Association, to engage to give France 
" the right of preference if, through unforeseen circumstances, 
the Association were compelled to sell its possessions." France's 
formal recognition of the Association as a government was, 
however, delayed by the discussion of boundary questions until 
the following February, and in the meantime Germany, Great 
Britain, Italy, Austria-Hungary, Holland and Spain had all recog- 
nized the Association; though Germany alone had done so — on 
the 8th of November— before the assembling of the conference. 

The conference assembled at Berlin on the 15th of November 
1884, and after protracted deliberations the " General Act of 
-.. the Berlin Conference " was signed by the representa- 

Beriin tives of all the powers attending the conference, on 
Confer- the 26th of February 1885. The powers represented 
"?" °* were Germany, Austria-Hungary, Belgium, Denmark, 
Spain, the United States, France, Great Britain, Italy, 
Holland, Portugal, Russia, Sweden and Norway, and Turkey, 
to name them in the alphabetical order adopted in the preamble 
to the French text of the General Act. Ratifications were 
deposited by all the signatory powers with the exception of the 
United States. It is unnecessary to examine in detail the 
results of the labours of the conference. The General Act dealt 
with six specific subjects: (1) freedom of trade in the basin of 
the Congo, (2) the slave trade, (3) neutrality of territories in the 
basin of the Congo, (4) navigation of the Congo, (5) navigation 
of the Niger, (6) rules for future occupation on the coasts of the 
African continent. It will be seen that the act dealt with other 
matters than the political partition of Africa; but, so far as 
they concern the present purpose, the results effected by the 
Berlin Act may be summed up as follows. The signatory powers 
undertook that any fresh act of taking possession on any portion 
of the African coast must be notified by the power taking posses- 
sion, or assuming a protectorate, to the other signatory powers. 
It was further provided that any such occupation to be valid 



must be effective. It is also noteworthy that the first reference 
in an international act to the obligations attaching to " spheres 
of influence " is contained in the Berlin Act. 

It will be remembered that when the conference assembled, 
the International Association of the Congo had only been recog- 
nized as a sovereign state by the United States and 
Germany. But King Leopold and his agents had floTottbe 
taken full advantage of the opportunity which the §ate° 
conference afforded, and before the General Act was 
signed the Association had been recognized by all the signatory 
powers, with the not very important exception of Turkey, and 
the fact communicated to the conference by Colonel Strauch. 
It was not, however, until two months later, in April 1885, that 
King Leopold, with the sanction of the Belgian legislature, 
formally assumed the headship of the new state; and on the 
1st of August in the same year His Majesty notified the powers 
that from that date the " Independent State of the Congo " 
declared that " it shall be perpetually neutral " in conformity 
with the provisions of the Berlin Act. Thus was finally consti- 
tuted the Congo Free State, under the sovereignty of King 
Leopold, though the boundaries claimed for it at that time were 
considerably modified by subsequent agreements. 

From 1885 the scramble among the powers went on with 
renewed vigour, and in the fifteen years that remained of the 
century the work of partition, so far as international The 
agreements were concerned, was practically completed. c /,; e / 
To attempt to follow the process of acquisition year partition 
by year would involve a constant shifting of attention treses. 
from one part of the continent to another, inasmuch as the 
scramble was proceeding simultaneously all over Africa. It will 
therefore be the most convenient plan to deal with the continent 
in sections. Before doing so, however, the international agree- 
ments which determined in the main the limits of the possessions 
of the various powers may be set forth. They are : — 

I. The agreement of the 1st of July 1890 between Great 
Britain and Germany defining their spheres of influence in East, 
West and South- West Africa. This agreement was the most 
comprehensive of all the " deals " in African territory, and in- 
cluded in return for the recognition of a British protectorate 
over Zanzibar the cession of Heligoland to Germany. 

II. The Anglo-French declaration of the 5th of August 1890, 
which recognized a French protectorate over Madagascar, 
French influence in the Sahara, and British influence between 
the Niger and Lake Chad. 

III. The Anglo-Portuguese treaty of the nth of June 1891, 
whereby the Portuguese possessions on the west and east coasts 
were separated by a broad belt of British territory, extending 
north to Lake Tanganyika. 

IV. The Franco-German convention of the 15th of March 
1894, by which the Central Sudan was left to France (this region 
by an Anglo-German agreement of the 15th of November 1893 
having been recognized as in the German sphere). By this 
convention France was able to effect a territorial junction of 
her possessions in North and West Africa with those in the Congo 
region. 

V. Protocols of the 24th of March and the 15th of April 1891, 
for the demarcation of the Anglo-Italian spheres. in East Africa. 

VI. The Anglo-French convention of the 14th of June 1898, 
for the delimitation of the possessions of the two countries west 
of Lake Chad, with the supplementary declaration of the 21st 
of March 1899 whereby France recognized the upper Nile valley 
as in the British sphere of influence. 

Coming now to a more detailed consideration of the operations 
of the powers, the growth of the Congo Free State, which occu- 
pied, geographically, a central position, may serve as The 
the starting-point for the story of the partition after growth of 
the Berlin conference. In the notification to the theCoogo 
powers of the 1st of August 1885, the boundaries of the e ' 

Free State were set out in considerable detail. The limits thus 
determined resulted partly from agreements made with France, 
Germany and Portugal, and partly from treaties with native 
chiefs. The state acquired the north bank of the Congo from 



34° 



AFRICA 



[HISTORY 



its mouth to a point in the unnavigable reaches, and in the 
interior the major part of the Congo basin. In the north-east 
the northern limit was 4 N. up to 30 E., which formed the 
eastern boundary of the state. The south-eastern frontier 
claimed by King Leopold extended to Lakes Tanganyika, Mweru 
and Bangweulu, but it was not until some years later that it 
was recognized and defined by the agreement of May 1894 with 
Great Britain. The international character of King Leopold's 
enterprise had not long been maintained, and his recognition as 
sovereign of the Free State confirmed the distinctive character 
which the Association had assumed, even before that event. 

In April 1887 France was informed that the right of pre- 
emption accorded to her in 1884 had not been intended by King 
Leopold to prejudice Belgium's right to acquire the Congo State, 
and in reply the French minister at Brussels took note of the 
explanation, " in so far as this interpretation is not contrary to 
pre-existing international engagements." By his will, dated the 
2nd of August 1889, King Leopold made Belgium formally heir to 
the sovereign rights of the Congo Free State. In 1895 an annexa- 
tion bill was introduced into the Belgian parliament, but at that 
time Belgium had no desire to assume responsibility for the 
Congo State, and the bill was withdrawn. In 1901, by the terms 
of a loan granted in 1890, Belgium had again an opportunity of 
annexing the Congo State, but a bill in favour of annexation was 
opposed by the government and was withdrawn after King 
Leopold had declared that the time was not ripe for the transfer. 
Concessionaire companies and a Domaine de la Couronne had been 
created in the state, from which the sovereign derived consider- 
able revenues — facts which helped to explain the altered attitude 
of Leopold II. The agitation in Great Britain and America 
against the Congo system of government, and the admissions of 
an official commission of inquiry concerning its maladministra- 
tion, strengthened, however, the movement in favour of transfer. 
Nevertheless in June 1906 the king again declared himself 
opposed to immediate annexation. But under pressure of public 
opinion the Congo government concluded, 28th of November 
1907, a new annexation treaty. As it stipulated for the continued 
existence of the crown domain the treaty provoked vehement 
opposition. Leopold II. was forced to yield, and an additional 
act was signed, sth of March 1908, providing for the suppression 
of the domain in return for financial subsidies. The treaty, as 
amended, was approved by the Belgian parliament in the session 
of 1908. Thus the Congo state, after an existence of 24 years 
as an independent power, became a Belgian colony. (See 
Congo Free State.) 

The area of the Free State, vast as it was, did not surfice to 
satisfy the ambition of its sovereign. King Leopold maintained 
that the Free State enjoyed equally with any other state the 
right to extend its frontiers. His ambition involved the state in 
the struggle between Great Britain and France for the upper 
Nile. To understand the situation it is necessary to remember 
the condition of the Egyptian Sudan at that time. The mahdi, 
Mahommed Ahmed, had preached a holy war against the 
Egyptians, and, after the capture of Khartum and the death of 
General C. G. Gordon, the Sudan was abandoned to the dervishes. 
The Egyptian frontier was withdrawn to Wadi Haifa, and the 
vast provinces of Kordofan, Darfur and the Bahr-el-Ghazal were 
given over to dervish tyranny and misrule. It was obvious that 
Egypt would sooner or later seek to recover her position in the 
Sudan, as the command of the upper Nile was recognized as 
essential to her continued prosperity. But the international 
position of the abandoned provinces was by no means clear. 
The British government, by the Anglo-German agreement of 
July 1890, had secured the assent of Germany to the statement 
that the British sphere of influence in East Africa was bounded 
on the west by the Congo Free State and by " the western water- 
shed of the basin of the upper Nile "; but this claim was not 
recognized either by France or by the Congo Free State. From 
her base on the Congo, France was busily engaged pushing 
forward along the northern tributaries of the great river. On 
the 27th of April 1887 an agreement was signed with the Congo 
Free State by which the right bank of, the Ubangi river was 



secured to French influence, and the left bank to the Congo Free 
State. The desire of France to secure a footing in the upper 
Nile valley was partly due, as has been seen, to her anxiety to 
extend a French zone across Africa, but it was also and to a large 
extent attributable to the belief, widely entertained The 
in France, that by establishing herself on the upper contest 
Nile France could regain the position in Egyptian forth ^ 
affairs which she had sacrificed in 1882. With these "P" erN " e - 
strong inducements France set steadily to work to consolidate 
her position on the tributary streams of the upper Congo basin, 
preparatory to crossing into the valley of the upper Nile. Mean- 
while a similar advance was being made from the Congo Free 
State northwards and eastwards. King Leopold had two objects 
in view — to obtain control of the rich province of the Bahr-el- 
Ghazal and to secure an outlet on the Nile. Stations were 
established on the Welle river, and in February 1891 Captain 
van Kerckhoven left Leopold ville for the upper Welle with the 
most powerful expedition which had, up to that time, been 
organized by the Free State. After some heavy fighting the 
expedition reached the Nile in September 1892, and opened up 
communications with the remains of the old Egyptian garrison 
at Wadelai. Other expeditions under Belgian officers penetrated 
into the Bahr-el-Ghazal, and it was apparent that King Leopold 
proposed to rely on effective occupation as an answer to any 
claims which might be advanced by either Great Britain or 
France. The news of what was happening in this remote region 
of Africa filtered through to Europe very slowly, but King 
Leopold was warned on several occasions that Great Britain 
would not recognize any claims by the Congo Free State on the 
Bahr-el-Ghazal. The difficulty was, however, that neither from 
Egypt, whence the road was barred by the khalifa (the successor 
of the mahdi), nor from Uganda, which was far too remote from 
the coast to serve as the base of a large expedition, could a 
British force be despatched to take effective occupation of the 
upper Nile valley. There was, therefore, danger lest the French 
should succeed in establishing themselves on the upper Nile 
before the preparations which were being made in Egypt for 
" smashing " the khalifa were completed. 

In these circumstances Lord Rosebery, who was then British 
foreign minister, began, and his successor, the 1st earl of 
Kimberley , completed, negotiations with King Leopold Tbe Aa gi . 
which resulted in the conclusion of the Anglo- Congolese Congolese 
agreement of 1 2th May 1894. By this agreement King agreement 
Leopold recognized the British sphere of influence °*' 894 - 
as laid down in the Anglo- German agreement of July 1890, 
and Great Britain granted a lease to King Leopold of certain 
territories in the western basin of the upper Nile, extending on 
the Nile from a point on Lake Albert to Fashoda, and westwards 
to the Congo-Nile watershed. The practical effect of this agree - 
ment was to give the Congo Free State a lease, during its 
sovereign's lifetime, of the old Bahr-el-Ghazal province, and to 
secure after His Majesty's death as much of that territory as 
lay west of the 30th meridian, together with access to a port on 
Lake Albert, to his successor. At the same time the Congo Free 
State leased to Great Britain a strip of territory, 155 m. in 
breadth, between the north end of Lake Tanganyika and the 
south end of Lake Albert Edward. This agreement was hailed 
as a notable triumph for British diplomacy. But the triumph 
was short-lived. By the agreement of July 1890 with Germany, 
Great Britain had been reluctantly compelled to abandon her 
hopes of through communication between the British spheres 
in the northern and southern parts of the continent, and to 
consent to the boundary of German East Africa marching with 
the eastern frontier of the Congo Free State. Germany frankly 
avowed that she did not wish to have a powerful neighbour 
interposed between herself and the Congo Free State. It was 
obvious that the new agreement would effect precisely what 
Germany had declined to agree to in 1 890. Accordingly Germany 
protested in such vigorous terms that, on the 22nd of June 1894, 
the offending article was withdrawn by an exchange of notes 
between Great Britain and the Congo Free State. Opinion in 
France was equally excited by the new agreement. It was 



HISTORY] 



AFRICA 



34 1 



obvious that the lease to the Congo Free State was intended 
to exclude France from the Nile by placing the Congo Free State 
as a barrier across her path. Pressure was brought to bear on 
King Leopold, from Paris, to renounce the rights acquired under 
the agreement, and on the 14th of August 1894 King Leopold 
signed an agreement with France by which, in exchange for 
France's acknowledgment of the Mbomu river as his northern 
frontier, His Majesty renounced all occupation and all exercise 
of political influence west of 30 E., and north of a line drawn 
from that meridian to the Nile along 5 30' N. 

This left the way still open for France to the Nile, and in 
June 1896 Captain J. Marchand left France with secret instruc- 
tions to lead an expedition into the Nile valley. On the 1st of 
March in the following year he left Brazzaville, and began a 
journey which all but plunged Great Britain and France into 
war. The difficulties which Captain Marchand had to overcome 
were mainly those connected with transport. In October 1897 
the expedition reached the banks of the Sue, the waters of which 
eventually flow into the Nile. Here a post was established and 
the " Faidherbe," a steamer which had been carried across the 
Congo-Nile watershed in sections, was put together and launched. 
On the 1st of May 1898 Marchand started on the final stage of 
his journey, and reached Fashoda on the 10th of July, having 
established a chain of posts en route. At Fashoda the French 
flag was at once raised, and a " treaty " made with the local 
chief. Meanwhile other expeditions had been concentrating on 

Fashoda — a mud-flat situated in a swamp, round 
French at which for many months raged the angry passions of 
Fashoda. two great peoples. French expeditions, with a certain 

amount of assistance from the emperor Menelek of 
Abyssinia, had been striving to reach the Nile from the east, so 
as to join hands with Marchand and complete the line of posts 
into the Abyssinian frontier. In this, however, they were un- 
successful. No better success attended the expedition under 
Colonel (afterwards Sir) Ronald Macdonald, R.E., sent by the 
British government from Uganda to anticipate the French in the 
occupation of the upper Nile. It was from the north that 
claimants arrived to dispute with the French their right to 
Fashoda, and all that the occupation of that dismal post implied. 
In 1896 an Anglo-Egyptian army, under the direction of Sir 
Herbert (afterwards Lord) Kitchener, had begun to advance 
southwards for the reconquest of the Egyptian Sudan. On the 
2nd of September 1898 Khartum was captured, and the khalifa's 
army dispersed. It was then that news reached the Anglo- 
Egyptian commander, from native sources, that there were 
white men flying a strange flag at Fashoda. The sirdar at once 
proceeded in a steamer up the Nile, and courteously but firmly 
requested Captain Marchand to remove the French flag. On 
his refusal the Egyptian flag was raised close to the French flag, 
and the dispute was referred to Europe for adjustment between 
the British and French governments. A critical situation ensued. 
Neither government was inclined to give way, and for a time 
war seemed imminent. Happily Lord Salisbury was able to 
announce, on the 4th of November, that France was willing to 
recognize the British claims, and the incident was finally closed 
on the 21st of March 1899, when an Anglo-French declaration 
was signed, by the terms of which France withdrew from the 
Nile valley and accepted a boundary line which satisfied her 
earlier ambition by uniting the whole of her territories in North, 
West and Central Africa into a homogeneous whole, while effectu- 
ally preventing the realization of her dream of a transcontinental 
empire from west to east. By this declaration it was agreed 
that the dividing line between the British and French spheres, 
north of the Congo Free State, should follow the Congo-Nile 
water-parting up to its intersection with the nth parallel of 
north latitude, from which point it was to be " drawn as far 
as the 1 5th parallel in such a manner as to separate in principle 
the kingdom of Wadai from what constituted in 1882 the province 
of Darfur," but in no case was it to be drawn west of the 21st 
degree of east longitude, or east of the 23rd degree. From the 
15th parallel the line was continued north and north-west to the 
intersection of the Tropic of Cancer with 16 E. French influence 



was to prevail west of this line, British influence to the east. 
Wadai was thus definitely assigned to France. 

When, by the declaration of the 21st of March 1899, France 
renounced all territorial ambitions in the upper Nile basin, King 
Leopold revived his claims to the Bahr-el-Ghazal 
province under the terms of the lease granted by theBahr- 
Article 2 of the Anglo-Congolese agreement of 1894. ei-ahazal. 
This step he was encouraged to take by the assertion 
of Lord Salisbury, in his capacity as secretary of state for foreign 
affairs during the negotiations with France concerning Fashoda, 
that the lease to King Leopold was still in full force. But the 
assertion was made simply as a declaration of British right to 
dispose of the territory, and the sovereign of the Congo State 
found that there was no disposition in Great Britain to allow 
the Bahr-el-Ghazal to fall into his hands. Long and fruitless 
negotiations ensued. The king at length (1904) sought to force 
a settlement by sending armed forces into the province. Diplo- 
matic representations having failed to secure the withdrawal of 
these forces, the Sudan government issued a proclamation 
which had the effect of cutting off the Congo stations from 
communication with the Nile, and finally King Leopold con- 
sented to an agreement, signed in London on the 9th of May 
1906, whereby the 1894 lease was formally annulled. The 
Bahr-el-Ghazal thenceforth became undisputedly an integral 
part of the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan. King Leopold had, however, 
by virtue of the 1894 agreement administered the comparatively 
small portion of the leased area in which his presence was not 
resented by France. This territory, including part of the west 
bank of the Nile and known as the Lado Enclave, the 1906 
agreement allowed King Leopold to " continue during his reign 
to occupy." Provision was made that within six months of 
the termination of His Majesty's reign the enclave should be 
handed over to the Sudan government (see Congo Free State). 
In this manner ended the long struggle for supremacy on the 
upper Nile, Great Britain securing the withdrawal of all European 
rivals. 

The course of events in the southern half of the continent 
may now be traced. By the convention of the 14th of February 
1885, in which Portugal recognized the sovereignty of PortugaTs 
the Congo Free State, and by a further convention trans- 
concluded with France in 1886, Portugal secured AMean 
recognition of her claim to the territory known as 
the Kabinda enclave, lying north of the Congo, but not to the 
northern bank of the river. By the same convention of 1885 
Portugal's claim to the southern bank of the river as far as Noki 
(the limit of navigation from the sea) had been admitted. Thus 
Portuguese possessions on the west coast extended from the 
Congo to the mouth of the Kunene river. In the interior the 
boundary with the Free State was settled as far as the Kwango 
river, but disputes arose as to the right to the country of Lunda, 
otherwise known as the territory of the Muato Yanvo. On the 
25th of May 1891 a treaty was signed at Lisbon, by which this 
large territory was divided between Portugal and the Free State. 
The interior limits of the Portuguese possessions in Africa south 
of the equator gave rise, however, to much more serious discus- 
sions than were involved in the dispute as to the Muato Yanvo's 
kingdom. Portugal, as has been stated, claimed all the territories 
between Angola and Mozambique, and she succeeded in inducing 
both France and Germany, in 1886, to recognize the king of 
Portugal's " right to exercise his sovereign and civilizing influence 
in the territories which separate the Portuguese possessions of 
Angola and Mozambique." The publication of the treaties 
containing this declaration, together with a map showing 
Portuguese claims extending over the whole of the Zambezi 
valley, and over Matabeleland to the south and the greater part 
of Lake Nyasa to the north, immediately provoked a formal 
protest from the British government. On the 13th of August 
1887 the British charg6 d'affaires at Lisbon transmitted to the 
Portuguese minister for foreign affairs a memorandum from 
Lord Salisbury, in which the latter formally protested " against 
any claims not founded on occupation," and contended that the 
doctrine of effective occupation had been admitted in principle 



342 



AFRICA 



[HISTORY 



by all the parties to the Act of Berlin. Lord Salisbury further 
stated that " Her Majesty's government cannot recognize 
Portuguese sovereignty in territory not occupied by her in 
sufficient strength to enable her to maintain order, protect 
foreigners and control the natives." To this Portugal replied 
that the doctrine of effective occupation was expressly confined 
by the Berlin Act to the African coast, but at the same time 
expeditions were hastily despatched up the Zambezi and some 
of its tributaries to discover traces of former Portuguese occu- 
pation. Matabeleland and the districts of Lake Nyasa were 
specially mentioned in the British protest as countries in which 
Her Majesty's government took a special interest. As a matter 
of fact the extension of British influence northwards to the 
Zambezi had engaged the attention of the British authorities 
ever since the appearance of Germany in South- West Africa 
and the declaration of a British protectorate over Bechuanaland. 
There were rumours of German activity in Matabeleland, and 
Rhodesia °f a Boer trek north of the Limpopo. Hunters and 
secured for explorers had reported in eulogistic terms on the rich 
Oreat goldfields and healthy plateau lands of Matabeleland 

and Mashonaland, ever both of which countries a 
powerful chief, Lobengula, claimed authority. There were many 
suitors for Lobengula's favours; but on the nth of February 
1888 he signed a treaty with J. S. Moffat, the assistant commis- 
sioner in Bechuanaland, the effect of which was to place all his 
territory under British protection. Both the Portuguese and 
the Transvaal Boers were chagrined at this extension of British 
influence. A number of Boers attempted unsuccessfully to 
trek into the country, and Portugal opposed her ancient claims 
to the new treaty. She contended that Lobengula's authority 
did not extend over Mashonaland, which she claimed as part of 
the Portuguese province of Sofala. 

Meanwhile preparations were being actively made by British 
capitalists for the exploitation of the mineral and other resources 
of Lobengula's territories. Two rival syndicates obtained, or 
claimed to have obtained, concessions from Lobengula; but in 
the summer of 1889 Cecil Rhodes succeeded in amalgamating 
the conflicting interests, and on the 29th of October of that year 
the British government granted a charter to the British South 
Africa Company (see Rhodesia). The first article of the charter 
declared that " the principal field of the operations " of the 
company " shall be the region of South Africa lying immediately 
to the north of British Bechuanaland, and to the north and west 
of the South African Republic, and to the west of the Portuguese 
dominions." No time was lost in making preparations for 
effective occupation. On the advice of F. C. Selous it was deter- 
mined to despatch an expedition to eastern Mashonaland by a 
new route, which would avoid the Matabele country. This plan 
was carried out in the summer of 1890, and, thanks to the rapidity 
with which the column moved and Selous's intimate knowledge 
of the country, the British flag was, on the nth of September, 
hoisted at a spot on the Makubusi river, where the town of 
Salisbury now stands, and the country taken possession of in 
the name of Queen Victoria. Disputes with the Portuguese 
ensued, and there were several frontier incidents which for a 
time embittered the relations between the two countries. 

Meanwhile, north of the Zambezi, the Portuguese were 
making desperate but futile attempts to repair the neglect 
of centuries by hastily organized expeditions and the 
p or t u . hoisting of flags. In 1888 an attempt to close the 
guese dis- Zambezi to British vessels was frustrated by the firm- 
putes In ness f L or o! Salisbury. In a despatch to the British 
Africa. minister at Lisbon, dated the 25th of June 1888, Lord 
Salisbury, after brushing aside the Portuguese claims 
founded on doubtful discoveries three centuries old, stated the 
British case in a few sentences: — 

It is (he wrote) an undisputed point that the recent discoveries 
of the English traveller, Livingstone, were followed by organized 
attempts on the part of English religious and commercial bodies to 
open up and civilize the districts surrounding and adjoining the lake. 
Many British settlements have been established, the access to which 
from the sea is by the rivers Zambesi and Shire. Her Majesty's 
government and the British public are much interested in the welfare 



of these settlements. Portugal does not occupy, and has never occu- 
pied, any portion of the lake, nor of the Shire; she has neithei 
authority nor influence beyond the confluence of the Shire and 
Zambesi, where her interior custom-house, now withdrawn, was 
placed by the terms of the Mozambique Tariff of 1877. 

In 1889 it became known to the British government that a 
considerable Portuguese expedition was being organized under 
the command of Major Serpa Pinto, for operating in the Zambezi 
region. In answer to inquiries addressed to the Portuguese 
government, the foreign minister stated that the object of the 
expedition was to visit the Portuguese settlements on the upper 
Zambezi. The British government was, even so late as 1889, 
averse from declaring a formal protectorate over the Nyasa 
region; but early in that year H. H. (afterwards Sir Harry) 
Johnston was sent out to Mozambique as British consul, with 
instructions to travel in the interior and report on the troubles 
that had arisen with the Arabs on Lake Nyasa and with the 
Portuguese. The discovery by D. J. Rankin in 1889 of a navi- 
gable mouth of the Zambezi — the Chinde — and the offer by 
Cecil Rhodes of a subsidy of £10,000 a year from the British 
South Africa Company, removed some of the objections to 
a protectorate entertained by the British government; but 
Johnston's instructions were not to proclaim a protectorate 
unless circumstances compelled him to take that course. To 
his surprise Johnston learnt on his arrival at the Zambezi that 
Major Serpa Pinto's expedition had been suddenly deflected to 
the north. Hurrying forward, Johnston overtook the Portu- 
guese expedition and warned its leader that any attempt to 
establish political influence north of the Ruo river would compel 
him to take steps to protect British interests. On arrival at the 
Ruo, Major Serpa Pinto returned to Mozambique for instruc- 
tions, and in his absence Lieutenant Coutinho crossed the river, 
attacked the Makololo chiefs and sought to obtain possession of 
the Shire highlands by a coup de main. John Buchanan, the 
British vice-consul, lost no time in declaring the country under 
British protection, and his action was subsequently confirmed 
by Johnston on his return from a treaty-making expedition on 
Lake Nyasa. On the news of these events reaching Europe the 
British government addressed an ultimatum to Portugal, as the 
result of which Lieutenant Coutinho's action was disavowed, 
and he was ordered to withdraw the Portuguese forces south 
of the Ruo. After prolonged negotiations, a convention was 
signed between Great Britain and Portugal on the 20th of August 
1890, by which Great Britain obtained a broad belt of territory 
north of the Zambezi, stretching from Lake Nyasa on the east, 
the southern end of Tanganyika on the north, and the Kabompo 
tributary of the Zambezi on the west; while south of the Zambezi 
Portugal retained the right bank of the river from a point ten 
miles above Zumbo, and the western boundary of her territory 
south of the river was made to coincide roughly with the 33rd 
degree of east longitude. The publication of the convention 
aroused deep resentment in Portugal, and the government, 
unable to obtain its ratification by the chamber of deputies, 
resigned. In October the abandonment of the convention was 
accepted by the new Portuguese ministry as a. fait accompli; 
but on the 14th of November the two governments signed an 
agreement for a modus vivendi, by which they engaged to recog- 
nize the territorial limits indicated in the convention of 20th 
August " in so far that from the date of the present agreement 
to the termination thereof neither Power will make Britlsb 
treaties, accept protectorates, nor exercise any act of and Porta- 
sovereignty within the spheres of influence assigned guese 
to the other party by the said convention." The !f« er *f 
breathing-space thus gained enabled feeling in Portugal 
to cool down, and on the nth of June 1891 another treaty was 
signed, the ratifications being exchanged on the 3rd of July, 
As already stated, this is the main treaty defining the British 
and Portuguese spheres both south and north of the Zambezi. 
It contained many other provisions relating to trade and naviga- 
tion, providing, inter alia, a maximum transit duty of 3% 
on imports and exports crossing Portuguese territories on the 
east coast to the British sphere, freedom of navigation of the 



HISTORY] 



AFRICA 



343 



Zambezi and Shir6 for the ships of all nations, and stipula- 
tions as to the making of railways, roads and telegraphs. The 
territorial readjustment effected was slightly more favourable 
to Portugal than that agreed upon by the 1890 convention. 
Portugal was given both banks of the Zambezi to a point ten 
miles west of Zumbo — the farthest settlement of the Portuguese 
on the river. South of the Zambezi the frontier takes a south 
and then an east course till it reaches the edge of the continental 
plateau, thence running, roughly, along the line of 33 E. south- 
ward to the north-eastern frontier of the Transvaal. Thus by 
this treaty Portugal was left in the possession of the coast-lands, 
while Great Britain maintained her right to Matabele and 
Mashona lands. The boundary between the Portuguese sphere 
of influence on the west coast and the British sphere of influence 
north of the Zambezi was only vaguely indicated; but it was 
to be drawn in such a manner as to leave the Barotse country 
within the British sphere, Lewanika, the paramount chief of 
the Marotse, claiming that his territory extended much farther 
to the west than was admitted by the Portuguese. In August 
1903 the question what were the limits of the Barotse kingdom 
was referred to the arbitration of the king of Italy. By his 
award, delivered in June 1965, the western limit of the British 
sphere runs from the northern frontier of German South-West 
Africa up the Kwando river to 22 E., follows that meridian north 
to 13° S., then runs due east to 24° E., and then north again to 
the frontier of the Congo State. 

Before the conclusion of the treaty of June 1891 with Portugal," 
the British government had made certain arrangements for the 
administration of the large area north of the Zambezi reserved 
to British influence. On the 1st of February Sir Harry Johnston 
was appointed imperial commissioner in Nyasaland, and a fort- 
night later the British South Africa Company intimated a 
desire to extend its operations north of the Zambezi. Negotia- 
tions followed, and the field of operations of the Chartered 
Company was, on the 2nd of April 1891, extended so as to cover 
(with the exception of Nyasaland) the whole of the British 
sphere of influence north of the Zambezi (now known as Northern 
Rhodesia). On the 14th of May a formal protectorate was 
declared over Nyasaland, including the Shire highlands and a 
belt of territory extending along the whole of the western shore 
of Lake Nyasa. The name was changed in 1893 to that of the 
British Central Africa Protectorate, for which designation was 
substituted in 1907 the more appropriate title of Nyasaland 
Protectorate. 

At the date of the assembling of the Berlin conference the 
German government had notified that the coast-line on the 
Germany's south-west of the continent, from the Orange river to 
share of Cape Frio, had been placed under German protection. 
South On the 13 th of April 1885 the German South-West 

Africa Company was constituted under an order of the 
imperial cabinet with the rights of state sovereignty, including 
mining royalties and rights, and a railway and telegraph mono- 
poly. In that and the following years the Germans vigorously 
pursued the business of treaty-making with the native chiefs in 
the interior; and when, in July 1890, the British and German 
governments came to, an agreement as to the limits of their 
respective spheres of influence in various parts of Africa, the 
boundaries of German South-West Africa were fixed in their 
present position. By Article III. of this agreement the north 
bank of the Orange river up to the point of its intersection by the 
20th degree of east longitude was made the southern boundary 
of the German sphere of influence. The eastern boundary fol- 
lowed the 20th degree of east longitude to its intersection by the 
22nd parallel of south latitude, then ran eastwards along that 
parallel to the point of its intersection by the 21st degree of east 
longitude. From that point it ran northwards along the last- 
named meridian to the point of its intersection by the 18th 
parallel of south latitude, thence eastwards along that parallel to 
the river Chobe or Kwando, and along the main channel of that 
river to its junction with the Zambezi, where it terminated. The 
northern frontier marched with the southern boundary of Portu- 
guese West Africa. The object of deflecting the eastern boundary 



near its northern termination was to give Germany access by her 
own territory to the upper waters of the Zambezi, and it was 
declared that this strip of territory was at no part to be less than 
20 English miles in width. 

To complete the survey of the political partition of Africa south 
of the Zambezi, it is necessary briefly to refer to the events con- 
nected with the South African Republic and the Orange 
Free State. In October 1886 the British government the Dutch 
made an agreement with the New Republic, a small Republics. 
community of Boer farmers who had in 1884-85 seized 
part of Zululand and set up a government of their own, defining 
the frontier between the New Republic and Zululand; but in 
July 1888 the New Republic was incorporated in the South 
African Republic. In a convention of July-August 1890 the 
British government and the government of the South African 
Republic confirmed the independence of Swaziland, and on the 
8th of November 1893 another convention was signed with the 
same object; but on the 19th of December 1894 the British 
government agreed to the South African Republic exercising 
" all rights and powers of protection, legislation, jurisdiction 
and administration over Swaziland and the inhabitants thereof," 
subject to certain conditions and provisions, and to the non- 
incorporation of Swaziland in the Republic. In the previous 
September Pondoland had been annexed to Cape Colony; on the 
23rd of April 1895 Tongaland was declared by proclamation to 
be added to the dominions of Queen Victoria, and in December 
1897 Zululand and Tongaland, or Amatongaland, were incor- 
porated with the colony of Natal. The history of the events that 
led up to the Boer War of 1 890-1 902 cannot be recounted here (see 
Transvaal, History), but in October 1899 the South African 
Republic and the Orange Free State addressed an ultimatum to 
Great Britain and invaded Natal and Cape Colony. As a result 
of the military operations that followed, the Orange Free State 
was, on the 28th of May 1900, proclaimed by Lord Roberts a 
British colony under the name " Orange River Colony," and the 
South African Republic was on the 25th of October 1900 incor- 
porated in the British empire as the "Transvaal Colony." In 
January 1903 the districts of Vryheid (formerly the New Re- 
public), Utrecht and part of the Wakkerstroom district, a tract 
of territory comprising in all about 7000 sq. m., were transferred 
from the Transvaal colony to Natal. In 1907 both the Transvaal 
and Orange River Colony were granted responsible government. 

On the east coast the two great rivals were Germany and Great 
Britain. Germany on the 30th of December 1886, and Great 
Britain on the nth of June 1891, formally recognized Aogto . 
the Rovuma river as the northern boundary of the German 
Portuguese sphere of influence on that coast; but it rivalry la 
was to the north of that river, over the vast area of j^£ a 
East or East Central Africa in which the sultan of 
Zanzibar claimed to exercise suzerainty, that the struggle be- 
tween the two rival powers was most acute. The independence 
of the sultans of Zanzibar had been recognized by the govern- 
ments of Great Britain and France in 1862, and the sultan's 
authority extended almost uninterruptedly along the coast of the 
mainland, from Cape Delgado in the south to Warsheik on the 
north — a stretch of coast more than a thousand miles long — 
though to the north the sultan's authority was confined to certain 
ports. In Zanzibar itself, where Sir John Kirk, Livingstone's 
companion in his second expedition, was British consul-general, 
British influence was, when the Berlin conference met, practically 
supreme, though German traders had established themselves on 
the island and created considerable commercial interests. Away 
from the coasts the limits and extent of the sultan's authority 
were far from being clearly defined. The sultan himself claimed 
that it extended as far as Lake Tanganyika, but the claim did not 
rest on any very solid ground of effective occupation. The little- 
known region of the Great Lakes had for some time attracted the 
attention of the men who were directing the colonial movement 
in Germany; and, as has been stated, a small band of pioneers 
actually landed on the mainland opposite Zanzibar in November 
1884, and made their first " treaty " with the chief of Mbuzini 
on the 19th of that month. Pushing up the Wami river the three 



344 



AFRICA 



[HISTORY 



adventurers reached the Usagara country, and concluded more 
" treaties," the net result being that when, in the middle of 
December, Karl Peters returned to the coast he brought back 
with him documents which were claimed to concede some 6o,ooo 
sq. m. of country to the German Colonization Society. Peters 
hurried back to Berlin, and on the 17th of February 1885 the 
German emperor issued a " Charter of Protection " by which 
His Majesty accepted the suzerainty of the newly-acquired 
territory, and " placed under our Imperial protection the 
territories in question." The conclusion of these treaties was, 
on the 6th of March, notified to the British government and to 
the sultan of Zanzibar. Immediately on receipt of the notifica- 
tion the sultan telegraphed an energetic protest to Berlin, alleging 
that the places placed under German protection had belonged to 
the sultanate of Zanzibar from the time of his fathers. The 
German consul-general refused to admit the sultan's claims, and 
meanwhile agents of the German society were energetically 
pursuing the task of treaty-making. The sultan (Seyyid Bargash) 
despatched a small force to the disputed territory, which was 
subsequently withdrawn, and in May sent a more imposing 
expedition under the command of General Lloyd Mathews, the 
commander-in-chief of the Zanzibar army, to the Kilimanjaro 
district, in order to anticipate the action of German agents. 
Meanwhile Lord Granville, then at the British Foreign Office, had 
taken up an extremely friendly attitude towards the 
araa- German claims. Before these events the sultan of 
vine's Zanzibar had, on more than one occasion, practically 
compiais- invited Great Britain to assume a protectorate over 

f 000 . his dominions. But the invitations had been declined. 
towards ^ . „ . . . , „ 

Germany. Egyptian affairs were, in the year 1885, causing con- 
siderable anxiety to the British government, and the 
fact was not without influence on the attitude of the British 
foreign secretary. On the 25th of May 1885, in a despatch to the 
British ambassador at Berlin, Lord Granville instructed Sir E. 
Malet to communicate the views of the British cabinet to Prince 
Bismarck: — 

I have to request your Excellency to state that the supposition 
that Her Majesty's Government have no intention of opposing the 
German scheme of colonization in the neighbourhood of Zanzibar 
is absolutely correct. Her Majesty's Government, on the contrary, 
view with favour these schemes, the realization of which will entaii 
the civilization of large tracts over which hitherto no European 
influence has been exercised, the co-operation of Germany with 
Great Britain in the work of the suppression of the slave gangs, and 
the encouragement of the efforts of the Sultan both in the extinc- 
tion of the slave trade and in the commercial development of his 
dominions. 

In the same despatch Lord Granville instructed Sir E. Malet 
to intimate to the German government that some prominent 
capitalists had originated a plan for a British settlement in the 
country between the coast and the lakes, which are the sources 
of the White Nile, " and for its connexion with the coast by a 
railway." But Her Majesty's government would not accord 
to these prominent capitalists the support they had called for, 
" unless they were fully satisfied that every precaution was 
taken to ensure that it should in no way conflict with the interests 
of the territory that has been taken under German protectorate," 
and Prince Bismarck was practically invited to say whether 
British capitalists were or were not to receive the protection of 
the British government. The reference in Lord Granville's des- 
patch was to a proposal made by a number of British merchants 
and others who had long been interested in Zanzibar, and who 
saw in the rapid advance of Germany a menace to the interests 
which had hitherto been regarded as paramount in the sultanate. 
In 1884 H. H. Johnston had concluded treaties with the chief 
of Taveta in the Kilimanjaro district, and had transferred these 
treaties to John Hutton of Manchester. Hutton, with Mr (after- 
wards Sir William) Mackinnon, was one of the founders of what 
subsequently became the Imperial British East Africa Company. 
But in the early stages the champions of British interests in East 
Africa received no support from their own government, while 
Germany was pushing her advantage with the energy of a recent 
convert to colonial expansion, and had even, on the coast, opened 
negotiations with the sultan of Witu, a small territory situated 



north of the Tana river, whose ruler claimed to be independent 
of Zanzibar. On the 5th of May 1885 the sultan of Witu executed 
a deed of sale and cession to a German subject of certain tracts 
of land on the coast, and later in the same year other treaties 
or sales of territory were effected, by which German subjects 
acquired rights on the coast-line claimed by the sultan. Inland, 
treaties had been concluded on behalf of Germany with the chiefs 
of the Kilimanjaro region, and an intimation to that effect made 
to the British government. But before this occurred the German 
government had succeeded in extracting an acknowledgment 
of the validity of the earlier treaties from the sultan of Zanzibar. 
Early in August a powerful German squadron appeared off 
Zanzibar, and on the 14th of that month the sultan yielded to 
the inevitable, acknowledged the German protectorate over 
Usagara and Witu, and undertook to withdraw his soldiers. 

Meanwhile negotiations had been opened for the appointment 
of an international commission, " for the purpose of inquiring 
into the claims of the sultans of Zanzibar to sovereignty p artft/ - on 
over certain territories on the east coast of Africa, of the 
and of ascertaining their precise limits." The govern- sultanate 
ments to be represented were Great Britain, France ^ anzlbar 
and Germany, and towards the end of 1885 commis- 
sioners were appointed. The commissioners reported on the 
9th of June 188.6, and assigned to the sultan the islands of Zan- 
zibar, Pemba, Lamu, Mafia and a number of other small islands. 
On the mainland they recognized as belonging- to the sultan a 
continuous strip of territory, 10 sea-miles in depth, from the 
south bank of the Minengani river, a stream a short distance 
south of the Rovuma, to Kipini, at the mouth of the Tana river, 
some 600 m. in length. North of Kipini the commissioners 
recognized as belonging to the sultan the stations of Kismayu, 
Brava, Marka and Mukdishu, with radii landwards of 10 sea- 
miles, and of Warsheik with a radius of 5 sea-miles. By an 
exchange of notes in October-November 1886 the governments 
of Great Britain and Germany accepted the reports of the de- 
limitation commissioners, to which the sultan adhered on the 
4th of the following December. But the British and German 
governments did more than determine what territories were to 
be assigned to the sultanate of Zanzibar. They agreed to a 
delimitation of their respective spheres of influence in East 
Africa. The territory to be affected by this arrangement was 
to be bounded on the south by the Rovuma river, " and on the 
north by a line which, starting from the mouth of the Tana river, 
follows the course of that river or its affluents to the point of 
intersection of the equator and the 38th degree of east longitude, 
thence strikes direct to the point of intersection of the 1st degree 
of north latitude with the 37 th degree of east longitude, where 
the line terminates." The line of demarcation between the 
British and the German spheres of influence was to start from 
the mouth of the river Wanga or Umba (which enters the ocean 
opposite Pemba Island to the north of Zanzibar), and running 
north-west was to skirt the northern base of the Kilimanjaro 
range, and thence to be drawn direct to the point on the eastern 
side of Victoria Nyanza intersected by the 1st degree of south 
latitude. South of this line German influence was to prevail; 
north of the line was the British sphere. The sultan's dominions 
having been thus truncated, Germany associated herself with 
the recognition of the " independence " of Zanzibar in which 
France and Great Britain had joined in 1862. The effect of 
this agreement was to define the spheres of influence of the two 
countries as far as Victoria Nyanza, but it provided no limit 
westwards, and left the country north of the Tana river, in which 
Germany had already acquired some interests near the coast, 
open for fresh annexations. The conclusion of the agreement 
immediately stimulated the enterprise both of the German East 
African Company, to which Peters's earlier treaties had been 
transferred, and of the British capitalists to whom reference 
had been made in Lord Granville's despatch. The German East 
African Company was incorporated by imperial charter in March 
1887, and the British capitalists formed themselves into the 
British East Africa Association, and on the 24th of May 1887 
obtained, through the good offices of Sir William Mackinnon, 



HISTORY] 



AFRICA 



345 



Bast 
Africa. 



a concession of the 10- miles strip of coast from the Umba river 
in the south to Kipini in the north. The British association 
further sought to extend its rights in the sphere reserved to 
British influence by making treaties with the native chiefs be- 
hind the coast strip, and for this purpose various expeditions 
were sent into the interior. When they had obtained conces- 
sions over the country for some 200 m. inland the associated 
Formation capitalists applied to the British government for a 
of British charter, which was granted on the 3rd of September 
1888, and the association became the Imperial British 
East Africa Company (see British East Africa). 
The example set by the British company in obtaining a lease 
of the coast strip between the British sphere of influence and the 
sea was quickly followed by the German association, which, on 
the 28th of April 1888, concluded an agreement with the sultan 
Khalifa, who had succeeded his brother Bargash, by which the 
association leased the strip of Zanzibar territory between the 
German sphere and the sea. It was not, however, until August 
that the German officials took over the administration, and their 
want of tact and ignorance of native administration almost 
immediately provoked a rebellion of so serious a character that 
it was not suppressed until' the imperial authorities had taken 
the matter in hand. Shortly after its suppression the administra- 
tion was entrusted to an imperial officer, and the sultan's rights 
on the mainland strip were bought outright by Germany for 
four millions of marks (£200,000). 

Events of great importance had been happening, meanwhile, 
in the country to the west and north of the British sphere of 
influence. The British company had sent caravans into the 
interior to survey the country, to make treaties with the native 
chiefs and to report on the commercial and agricultural possi- 
bilities. One of these had gone up the Tana river. But another 
and a rival expedition was proceeding along the northern bank 
of this same river. Karl Peters, whose energy cannot be denied, 
whatever may be thought of his methods, set out with an armed 
caravan up the Tana on the pretext of leading an expedition to 
the relief of Emin Pasha, the governor of the equatorial province 
of the Egyptian Sudan, then reported to be hemmed in by the 
dervishes at Wadelai. His expedition was not sanctioned by 
the German government, and the British naval commander had 
orders to prevent his landing. But Peters succeeded in evading 
the British vessels and proceeded up the river, planting German 
flags and fighting the natives who opposed his progress. Early 
in 1890 he reached Kavirondo, and there found letters from 
Mwanga, king of Uganda, addressed to F. J. Jackson, the 
leader of an expedition sent out by the British East Africa 
Uganda Company, imploring the company's representative 
secured by to come to his assistance and offering to accept the 
British flag. To previous letters, less plainly couched, 
from the king, Jackson had returned the answer that 
his instructions were not to enter Uganda, but that he would 
do so in case of need. The letters that fell into Peters's hands 
were in reply to those from Jackson. Peters did not hesitate 
to open the letters, and on reading them he at once proceeded 
to Uganda, where, with the assistance of the French Roman 
Catholic priests, he succeeded in inducing Mwanga to sign a 
loosely worded treaty intended to place him under German 
protection. On hearing of this Jackson at once set out for 
Uganda, but Peters did not wait for his arrival, leaving for the 
south of Victoria Nyanza some days before Jackson arrived 
at Mengo, Mwanga's capital. As Mwanga would not agree to 
Jackson's proposals, Jackson returned to the coast, leaving a 
representative at Mengo to protect the company's interests. 
Captain (afterwards Sir) F. D. Lugard, who had recently entered 
the company's employment, was at once ordered to proceed to 
Uganda. But in the meantime an event of great importance 
had taken place, the conclusion of the agreement between Great 
Britain and Germany with reference to their different spheres of 
influence in various parts of Africa. 

The Anglo-German agreement of the 1st of July 1890 has 
already been referred to and its importance insisted upon. 
Here we have to deal with the provisions in reference to East 



Great 
Britain, 



Africa. In return for the cession of Heligoland, Lord Salisbury 
obtained from Germany the recognition of a British protectorate 
over the - dominions of the sultan of Zanzibar, including the 
islands of Zanzibar and Pemba, but excluding the strip leased to 
Germany, which was subsequently ceded absolutely to Germany. 
Germany further agreed to withdraw the protectorate declared 
over Witu and the adjoining coast up to Kismayu in favour of 
Great Britain, and to recognize as within the British sphere of 
influence the vast area bounded, on the south by the frontier 
line laid down in the agreement of 1886, which was to be extended 
along the first parallel of south latitude across Victoria Nyanza 
to the frontiers of the Congo Free State, on the west by the 
Congo Free State and the western watershed of the Nile, and on 
the north by a line commencing on the coast at the north bank of 
the mouth of the river Juba, then ascending that bank of the 
river until it reached the territory at that time regarded as 
reserved to the influence of Italy 1 in Gallaland and Abyssinia, 
when it followed the frontier of the Italian sphere to the confines 
of Egypt. To the south-west of the German sphere in East 
Africa the boundary was formed by the eastern and northern 
shore of Lake Nyasa, and round the western shore to the mouth 
of the Songwe river, from which point it crossed the Nyasa- 
Tanganyika plateau to the southern end of the last-named lake, 
leaving the Stevenson Road on the British side of the i,i m itsot 
boundary. The effect of this treaty was to remove German 
all serious causes of dispute about territory between Bast 
Germany and Great Britain in East Africa. It ren- ^ r f . ca . 
dered quite valueless Peters's treaty with Mwanga 
and his promenade along the Tana; it freed Great Britain from 
any fear of German competition to the northwards, and recog- 
nized that her influence extended to the western limits of the 
Nile valley. But, on the other hand, Great Britain had to relin- 
quish the ambition of connecting her sphere of influence in the 
Nile valley with her possessions in Central and South Africa. On 
this point Germany was quite obdurate; and, as already stated, 
an attempt subsequently made (May 1894) to secure this object 
by the lease of a strip of territory from the Congo Free State was 
frustrated by German opposition. 

Uganda having thus been assigned to the British sphere of 
influence by the only European power in a position to contest 
its possession with her, the subsequent history of that region, 
and of the country between the Victoria Nyanza and the coast, 
must be traced in the articles on British East Africa and 
Uganda, but it may be well briefly to record here the following 
facts: — The Imperial British East Africa Company, finding the 
burden of administration too heavy for its financial resources, 
and not receiving the assistance it felt itself entitled to receive 
from the imperial authorities, intimated that it would be com- 
pelled to withdraw at the end of the year 1892. Funds were 
raised to enable the company to continue its administration until 
the end of March 1893, and a strong public protest against 
evacuation compelled the government to determine in favour 
of the retention of the country. In January 1893 Sir Gerald 
Portal left the coast as a special commissioner to inquire into the 
" best means of dealing with the country, whether through 
Zanzibar or otherwise." On the 31st of March the union jack 
was raised, and on the 29th of May a fresh treaty was concluded 
with King Mwanga placing his country under British protection. 
A formal protectorate was declared over Uganda proper on the 
19th of June 1894, which was subsequently extended so as to 
include the countries westwards towards the Congo Free State, 
eastwards to the British East Africa protectorate and Abyssinia, 
and northwards to the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan. The British 
East Africa protectorate was constituted in June 1895, when 
the Imperial British East Africa Company relinquished all its 
rights in exchange for a money payment, and the administration 
was assumed by the imperial authorities. On the 1st of April 
1902 the eastern province of the Uganda protectorate was 
transferred to the British East Africa protectorate, which thus 
secured control of the whole length of the so-called Uganda 

1 At this period negotiations between Great Britain and Italy 
had begun but were not concluded. 



346 



AFRICA 



[HISTORY 



railway, and at the same time obtained access to the Victoria 
Nyanza. 

Early in the 'eighties, as already seen, Italy had obtained her 
first formal footing on the African coast at the Bay of Assab 

(Aussa) on the Red Sea. In 1885 the troubles in 
& "£ " which Egypt found herself involved compelled the 
Africa. khedive and his advisers to loosen their hold on 

the Red Sea littoral, and, with the tacit approval 
of Great Britain, Italy took possession of Massawa and 
other ports on that coast. By 1888 Italian influence had 
been extended from Ras Kasar on the north to the northern 
frontier of the French colony of Obok on the south, a distance 
of some 650 m. The interior limits of Italian influence were 
but ill defined, and the negus Johannes (King John) of Abyssinia 
viewed with anything but a favourable eye the approach of the 
Italians towards the Abyssinian highlands. In January 1887 an 
Italian force was almost annihilated at Dogali, but the check 
only served to spur on the Italian government to fresh efforts. 
The Italians occupied Keren and Asmara in the highlands, and 
eventually, in May 1889, concluded a treaty of peace and friend- 
ship with the negus Menelek, who had seized the throne on the 
death of Johannes, killed in battle with the dervishes in March 
of the same year. This agreement, known as the treaty of 
Uccialli, settled the frontiers between Abyssinia and the Italian 
sphere, and contained the following article: — 

XVII. His Majesty the King of Kings of Ethiopia consents to 
avail himself of the Italian government for any negotiations which 
he may enter into with the other powers or governments. 

In Italy and by other European governments this article 
was generally regarded as establishing an Italian protectorate 
over Abyssinia; but this interpretation was never accepted by 
the emperor Menelek, and at no time did Italy succeed in 
establishing any very effective control over Abyssinian affairs. 
North of the Italian coast sphere the Red Sea littoral was still 
under Egyptian rule, while immediately to the south a small 
stretch of coast on the Gulf of Tajura constituted the sole 
French possession on the East African mainland (see Somali- 
land). Moreover, when Egyptian claims to the Somali coast 
were withdrawn, Great Britain took the opportunity to establish 
her influence on the northern Somali coast, opposite Aden. 
Between the 1st of May 1884 and the 15th of March 1886 ten 
treaties were concluded, placing under British influence the 
northern Somali coast from Ras Jibuti on the west to Bandar 
Ziada on the east. In the meantime Italy, not content with her 
acquisitions on the Red Sea, had been concluding treaties with 
the Somali chiefs on the east coast. The first treaty was made 
with the sultan of Obbia on the 8th of February 1889. Later 
in the same year the British East Africa Company transferred 
to Italy — the transference being subsequently approved by the 
sultan of Zanzibar — the ports of Brava, Marka, Mukdishu and 
Warsheik, leased from Zanzibar. On the 24th of March 1891 
an agreement between Italy and Great Britain fixed the northern 
bank of the Juba up to latitude 6° N. as the southern boundary 
of Italian influence in Somaliland, the boundary being provision- 
ally prolonged along lines of latitude and longitude to the inter- 
section of the Blue Nile with 35° E. longitude. On the 15th of 
April 1 89 1 a further agreement fixed the northern limit of the 
Italian sphere from Ras Kasar on the Red Sea to the point on 
the Blue Nile just mentioned. By this agreement Italy was to 
have the right temporarily to occupy Kassala, which was left 
in the Anglo-Egyptian sphere, in trust for Egypt — a right of 
which she availed herself in 1894. To complete the work of 
delimitation the British and Italian governments, on the 5th of 
May 1894, fixed the boundary of the British sphere of influence 
in Somaliland from the Anglo-French boundary, which had been 
settled in February 1.888. 

But while Great Britain was thus lending her sanction to 
Italy's ambitious schemes, the Abyssinian emperor was becoming 
more and more incensed at Italy's pretensions to exercise a 
protectorate over Ethiopia. In 1893 Menelek denounced the 
treaty of Uccialli, and eventually, in a great battle, fought at 
Adowa on the 1st of March 1896, the Italians were disastrously 



defeated. By the subsequent treaty of Adis Ababa, concluded 
on the 26th of October 1896, the whole of the country to the 
south of the Mareb, Belesa and Muna rivers was 
restored to Abyssinia, and Italy acknowledged the pea deoce 
absolute independence of Abyssinia. The effect of of 
this was practically to destroy the value of the Abyssinia 
Anglo-Italian agreement as to the boundaries to the 2*25" 
south and west of Abyssinia; and negotiations were 
afterwards set on foot between the emperor Menelek and his 
European neighbours with the object of determining the 
Abyssinian frontiers. Italian Somaliland, bordering on the 
south-eastern frontier of Abyssinia, became limited to & 
belt of territory with a depth inland from the Indian 
Ocean of from 180 to 250 m. The negotiations concerning 
the frontier lasted until 1908, being protracted over the 
question as to the possession of Lugh, a town on the Juba, 
which eventually fell to Italy. After the battle of Adowa the 
Italian government handed over the administration of the 
southern part of the country to the Benadir Company, but in 
January 1905 the government resumed control and at the same 
time transformed the leasehold rights it held from the sultan of 
Zanzibar into sovereign rights by the payment to the sultan of 
£144,000. To facilitate her communications with the interior, 
Italy also secured from the British government the lease of a 
small area of land immediately to the north of Kismayu. In 
British Somaliland the frontier fixed by agreement with Italy in 
1894 was modified, in so far as it marched with Abyssinian terri- 
tory, by an agreement which Sir Rennell Rodd concluded with 
the emperor Menelek in 1897. The effect of this agreement was 
to reduce the area of British Somaljland from 75,000 to 68,000 
sq. m. In the same year France concluded an agreement 
with the emperor, which is known to have fixed the frontier of 
the French Somali Coast protectorate at a distance of 90 
kilometres (56 m.) from the coast. The determination of the 
northern, western and southern limits of Abyssinia proved a 
more difficult matter. A treaty of July 1900 followed by an 
agreement of November 1901 defined the boundaries of Eritrea 
on the side of Abyssinia and the Sudan respectively. In certain 
details the boundaries thus laid down were modified by an Anglo- 
Italian- Abyssinian treaty signed at Adis Ababa on the 15th of 
May 1902. On the same day another treaty was signed at the 
Abyssinian capital by Sir John Harrington, the British minister 
plenipotentiary, and the emperor Menelek, whereby the western, 
or Sudan-Abyssinian, frontier was defined as far south as the 
intersection of 6° N. and 35 E. Within the British sphere 
were left the Atbara up to Gallabat, the Blue Nile up to Famaka 
and the Sobat up to the junction of the Baro and Pibor. While 
not satisfying Abyssinian claims to their full extent, the frontier 
laid down was on the whole more favourable to Abyssinia than 
was the line fixed in the Anglo-Italian agreement of 1891. On 
the other hand, Menelek gave important economic guarantees 
and concessions to the Sudan government. 

In Egypt the result of the abolition of the Dual Control was 
to make British influence virtually predominant, though theo- 
retically Turkey remained the suzerain power; and after the 
reconquest of the Sudan by the Anglo-Egyptian army a con- 
vention between the British and Egyptian governments was 
signed at Cairo on the 19th of January 1899, which, inter alia, 
provided for the joint use of the British and Egyptian flags in 
the territories south of the 22nd parallel of north latitude. 
From the international point of view the British position in 
Egypt was strengthened by the Anglo-French declaration of 
the 8th of April 1904. For some time previously there had been 
a movement on both sides of the Channel in favour" of 
the settlement of a number of important questions /w/o- 
in which British and French interests were involved. French 
The movement was no doubt strengthened by the *«**«■ 
desire to reduce to their least dimensions the possible ^t^jggj 
causes of trouble between the two .countries at a time 
when the outbreak of hostilities between Russia (the ally of 
France) and Japan (the ally of Great Britain) rendered the 
European situation peculiarly delicate. On the 8th of April 



HISTORY] 



AFRICA 



347 



1904 there was signed in London by the British foreign secretary, 
the marquess of Lansdowne, and the French ambassador, M. Paul 
Cambon, a series of agreements relating to several parts of the 
globe. Here we are concerned only with the joint declaration 
respecting Egypt and Morocco and a convention relating, in part, 
to British and French frontiers in West Africa. The latter we 
shall have occasion to refer to later. The former, notwithstand- 
ing the declarations embodied in it that there was " no intention 
of altering the political status " either of Egypt or of Morocco, 
cannot be ignored in any account of the partition in Africa. 
With regard to Egypt the French government declared " that 
they will not obstruct the action of Great Britain in that country 
by asking that a limit of time be fixed for the British occupation 
or in any other manner." France also assented — as did sub- 
sequently the other powers interested — to a khedivial decree 
simplifying the international control exercised by the Caisse de 
la Dette over the finances of Egypt. 

In order to appreciate aright that portion of the declaration 
relating to Morocco it is necessary to say a few words about the 
course of French policy in North- West Africa. In Tunisia the 
work of strengthening the protectorate established in 1881 had 
gone steadily forward; but it was in Algeria that the extension 
of French influence had been most marked. The movement of 
expansion southwards was inevitable. With the progress of 
exploration it became increasingly evident that the Sahara con- 
stituted no insurmountable barrier between the French posses- 
sions in North and West Central Africa. But France had not only 
the hope of placing Algeria in touch with the Sudan to spur her 
forward. To consolidate her position in North- West Africa she 
desired to make French influence supreme in Morocco. The re- 
lations between the two countries did not favour the realization of 
that ambition. The advance southwards of the French forces of 
occupation evoked loud protests from the Moorish government, 
particularly with regard to the occupation in 1900-1901 of the 
Tuat Oases. Under the Franco-Moorish treaty of 1845 the frontier 
between Algeria and Morocco was defined from the Mediterranean 
coast as far south as the pass of Teniet el Sassi, in about 34 N. ; 
beyond that came a zone in which no frontier was defined, but 
in which the tribes and desert villages (ksurs) belonging to the 
respective spheres of influence were named; while south of the 
desert villages the treaty stated that in view of the character of 
the country " the delimitation of it would be superfluous." 
Though the frontier was thus left undefined, the sultan main- 
tained that in her advance southwards France had trespassed 
on territories that unmistakably belonged to Morocco. After 
some negotiation, however, a protocol was signed in Paris on 
Prance's tne 2 ° tn of July 1901, and commissioners appointed to 
privileged devise measures for the co-operation of the French and 
position in ]\ioorish authorities in the maintenance of peaceful 
conditions in the frontier region. It was reported that 
in April 1902 the commissioners signed an agreement whereby 
the Sharifan government undertook to consolidate its authority 
on the Moorish side of the frontier as far south as Figig. The 
agreement continued: " Le Gouvernement frangais, en raison de 
son voisinage, lui pretera son appui, en cas de besoin. Le Gouverne- 
ment franqais etablira son autoriti et la paix dans les regions du 
Sahara, et le Gouvernement marocain, son voisin, lui aidera de 
tout son pouvoir." Meanwhile in the northern districts of Morocco 
the conditions of unrest under the rule of the young sultan, Abd 
el Aziz IV., were attracting an increasing amount of attention in 
Europe and were calling forth demands for their suppression. 
It was in these circumstances that in the Anglo-French declara- 
tion of April 1904 the British government recognized " that it 
appertains to France, more particularly as a power whose 
dominions are conterminous for a great distance with those of 
Morocco, to preserve order in that country, and to provide 
assistance for the purpose of all administrative, economic, 
financial and military reforms which it may require." Both 
parties to the declaration, " inspired by their feeling of sincere 
friendship for Spain, take into special consideration the interests 
which that country derives from her geographical position and 
from her territorial possessions on the Moorish coast of the 



Mediterranean. In regard to these interests the French govern- 
ment will come to an understanding with the Spanish govern- 
ment." The understanding thus foreshadowed was reached 
later in the same year, Spain securing a sphere of interest on the 
Mediterranean coast. In pursuance of the policy marked out in 
the Anglo-French declaration, France was seeking to strengthen 
her influence in Morocco when in 1905 the attitude of Germany 
seriously affected her position. On the 8th of July France 
secured from the German government formal " recognition of 
the situation created for France in Morocco by the contiguity of 
a vast extent of territory of Algeria and the Sharifan empire, and 
by the special relations resulting therefrom between the two 
adjacent countries, as well as by the special interest for France, 
due to this fact, that order should reign in the Sharifan Empire." 
Finally, in January- April 1906, a conference of the powers was 
held at Algeciras to devise, by invitation of the sultan, a scheme 
of reforms to be introduced into Morocco (q.v.). French capital 
was allotted a larger share than that of any other power in the 
Moorish state bank which it was decided to institute, and French 
and Spanish officers were entrusted with the organization of a 
police force for the maintenance of order in the principal coast 
towns. The new regime had not been fully inaugurated, however, 
when a series of outrages led, in 1907, to the military occupation 
by France of Udja, a town near the Algerian frontier, and of the 
port of Casablanca on the Atlantic coast of Morocco. 

It only remains to be noted, in connexion with the story of 
French activity in North- West Africa, that with such energy was 
the penetration of the Sahara pursued that in April 1904 flying 
columns from Insalah and Timbuktu met by arrangement in 
mid-desert, and in the following year it was deemed advisable to 
indicate on the maps the boundary between the Algerian and 
French West African territories. 

Brief reference must be made to the position of Tripoli. While 
Egypt was brought under British control and Tunisia became a 
French protectorate, Tripoli remained a province of the Turkish 
empire with undefined frontiers in the hinterland, a state of 
affairs which more than once threatened to lead to trouble with 
France during the expansion of the latter's influence in the 
Sahara. As already stated, Italy early gave evidence that it was 
her ambition to succeed to the province, and, not only by the 
sultan of Turkey but in Italy also, the Anglo-French declaration 
of March 1899, respecting the limits of the British and French 
spheres of influence in north Central Africa, was viewed with 
some concern. By means of a series of public utterances on the 
part of French and Italian statesmen in the winter 1901-1902 it 
was made known that the two powers had come to an 
understanding with regard to their interests in North Uteres* /a 
Africa, and in May 1902 Signor Prinetti, then Italian Tripoli. 
minister for foreign affairs, speaking in parliament in 
reply to an interpellation on the subject of Tripoli, declared that 
if " the status quo in the Mediterranean were ever disturbed, Italy 
would be sure of finding no one to bar the way to her legitimate 
aspirations." 

At the opening of the Berlin conference Spain had established 
no formal claim to any part of the coast to the south of Morocco; 
but while the conference was sitting, on the 9th of January 1885, 
the Spanish government intimated that in view of the importance 
of the Spanish settlements on the Rio de Oro, at Angra de Cintra, 
and at Western Bay (Cape Blanco), and of the docu- 
ments signed with the independent tribes on that colonies. 
coast, the king of Spain had taken under his protection 
" the territories of the western coast of Africa comprised between 
the fore-mentioned Western Bay and Cape Bojador." The in- 
terior limits of the Spanish sphere were defined by an agreement 
concluded in 1900 with France. By this document some 70,000 
sq. m. of the western Sahara were recognized as Spanish. 

The same agreement settled a long-standing dispute between 
Spain and France as to the ownership of the district around the 
Muni river to be south of Cameroon, Spain securing a block of 
territory with a coast-line from the Campo river on the north to 
the Muni river on the south. The northern frontier is formed by 
the German Cameroon colony, the eastern by 11° 20' E., and the 



348 



AFRICA 



[HISTORY 



southern by the first parallel of north latitude to its point of inter- 
section with the Muni river. 

Apart from this small block of Spanish territory south of 
Cameroon, the stretch of coast between Cape Blanco and the 

mouth of the Congo is partitioned among four European 
?h V ' S a"n°a P owers — Great Britain, France, Germany and Portugal 
coast. — an d the negro republic of Liberia. Following the 

coast southwards from Cape Blanco is first the French 
colony of Senegal, which is indented, along the Gambia river, by 
the small British colony of that name, and then the comparatively 
small territory of Portuguese Guinea, all that remains on this 
coast to represent Portugal's share in the scramble in a region 
where she once played so conspicuous a part. To the south of 
Portuguese Guinea is the French Guinea colony, and still going 
south and east are the British colony of Sierra Leone, the republic 
of Liberia, the French colony of the Ivory coast, the British Gold 
Coast, German Togoland, French Dahomey, the British colony 
(formerly known as the Lagos colony) and protectorate of 
Southern Nigeria, the German colony of Cameroon, the Spanish 
settlements on the Muni river, the French Congo colony, and the 
small Portuguese enclave north of the Congo to which reference 
has already been made, which is administratively part of the 
Angola colony. When the General Act of the Berlin conference 
was signed the whole of this coast-line had not been formally 
claimed; but no time was lost by the powers interested in 
notifying claims to the unappropriated sections, and the con- 
flicting claims put forward necessitated frequent adjustments by 
international agreements. By a Franco-Portuguese agreement 
of the 1 2th of May 1886 the limits of Portuguese Guinea — sur- 
rounded landwards by French territory — were defined, and by 
agreements with Great Britain in 1885 and France in 1892 and 
1907 the Liberian republic was confined to an area of about 
43,000 sq. m. 

The real struggle in West Africa was between France and 
Great Britain, and France played the dominant part, the ex- 
haustion of Portugal, the apathy of the British government 
and the late appearance of Germany in the field being all element* 
that favoured the success of French policy. Before tracing the 
steps in the historic contest between France and Great Britain 
it is necessary, however, to deal briefly with the part played 
by Germany. She naturally could not be disposed of by the 
chief rivals as easily as were Portugal and Liberia. It will be 
remembered that Dr Nachtigal, while the proposals for the 
Berlin conference were under discussion, had planted the German 
flag on the coast of Togo and in Cameroon in the month of July 
1884. In Cameroon Germany found herself with Great Britain 
for a neighbour to the north, and with France as her southern 
neighbour on the Gabun river. The utmost activity was dis- 
played in making treaties with native chiefs, and in securing 
as wide a range of coast for German enterprise as was possible. 
After various provisional agreements had been concluded between 
Great Britain and Germany, a " provisional line of demarcation " 
was adopted in the famous agreement of the 1st of July 1890, 
starting from the head of the Rio del Rey creek and going to 
the point, about 9 8' E., marked "rapids" on the British 
Admiralty chart. By a further agreement of the 14th of April 
1 893 , the right bank of the Rio del Rey was made the boundary 
between the Oil Rivers Protectorate (now Southern Nigeria) and 
Cameroon. In the following November (1893) the boundary 
was continued from the " rapids " before mentioned, on the 
Calabar or Cross river, in a straight line towards the centre of 
the town of Yola, on the Benue river. Yola itself, with a radius 
Qermany °^ some 3 m -> was Ifift m tne British sphere, and the 
in west German boundary followed the circle eastwards from 
Centra/ the point of intersection as it neared Yola until it 
AMca - met the Benue river. From that point it crossed the 
river to the intersection of the 13th degree of longitude with 
the 10th degree of north latitude, and then made direct for a 
point on the southern shore of Lake Chad " situated 35 minutes 
east of the meridian of Kuka." By this agreement the British 
government withdrew from a considerable section of the upper 
waters of the Benue with which the Royal Niger Company had 



entered into relations. The limit of Germany's possible extension 

eastwards was fixed at the basin of the river Shari, and Darfur, 

Kordofan and the Bahr-el-Ghazal were to be excluded from 

her sphere of influence. The object of Great Britain in making 

the sacrifice she did was two-fold. By satisfying Germany's 

desire for a part of Lake Chad a check was put on French designs 

on the Benue region, while by recognizing the central Sudan 

(Wadai, &c.) in the German sphere, a barrier was interposed 

to the advance of France from the Congo to the Nile. This 

last object was not attained, inasmuch as Germany in coming 

to terms with France as to the southern and eastern limits of 

Cameroon abandoned her claims to the central Sudan. She had 

already, on the 24th of December 1885, signed a protocol with 

France fixing her southern frontier, where it was coterminous 

with the French Congo colony. But to the east German explorers 

were crossing the track of French explorers from the northern 

bank of the Ubangi, and the need for an agreement was obvious. 

Accordingly, on the 4th of February 1894, a protocol — which, 

some weeks later, was confirmed by a convention — was signed 

at Berlin, by which France accepted the presence of Germany 

on Lake Chad as a fait accompli and effected the best bargain 

she could by making the left bank of the Shari river, from its 

outlet into Lake Chad to the 10th parallel of north latitude, 

the eastern limit of German extension. From this point the 

boundary line went due west some 230 m., then turned south, 

and with various indentations joined the south-eastern frontier, 

which had been slightly extended so as to give Germany access 

to the Sanga river — a tributary of the Congo. Thus, early in 

1894, the German Cameroon colony had reached fairly definite 

limits. In 1908 another convention, modifying the frontier, 

gave Germany a larger share of the Sanga, while France, among 

other advantages, gained the left bank of the Shari to io° 40' N. 

The German Togoland settlements occupy a narrow strip 

of the Guinea coast, some 35 m. only in length, wedged in 

between the British Gold Coast and French Dahomey. At 

first France was inclined to dispute Germany's claims to Little 

Popo and Porto Seguro; but in December 1885 the French 

government acknowledged the German protectorate over these 

places, and the boundary between French and German „ , , 
. ■ ,-i , t ■ , 1 Exclusion 

territory, which runs north from the coast to the nth f 

degree of latitude, was laid down by the Franco- Germany 
German convention of the 12th of July 1897. The %£" t0e 
fixing of the nth parallel as the northern boundary ' 

of German expansion towards the interior was not accomplished 
without some sacrifice of German ambitions. Having secured 
an opening on Lake Chad for her Cameroon colony, Germany 
was anxious to obtain a footing on the middle Niger for Togoland. 
German expeditions reached Gando, one of the tributary states 
of the Sokoto empire on the middle Niger, and, notwithstanding 
the existence of prior treaties with Great Britain, sought to con- 
clude agreements with the sultan of that country. But this 
German ambition conflicted both with the British and the French 
designs in West Africa, and eventually Germany had to be content 
with the nth parallel as her northern frontier. On the west 
the Togoland frontier on the coast was fixed in July 1886 by 
British and German commissioners at 1® 10' E. longitude, and 
its extension towards the interior laid down for a short distance. 
A curious feature in the history of its prolongation was the 
establishment in 1888 of a neutral zone wherein neither power 
was to seek to acquire protectorates nor exclusive influence. 
It was not until November 1899 that, as part of the Samoa 
settlement, this neutral zone was partitioned between the two 
powers and the frontier extended to the nth parallel. 

The story of the struggle between France and Great Britain 
in West Africa may roughly be divided into two sections, the 
first dealing with the Coast colonies, the second deal- . -. 
ing with the struggle for the middle Niger and Lake French 
Chad. As regards the Coast colonies, France was rivalry in 
wholly successful in her design of. isolating all Great YmL 
Britain's separate possessions in that region, and of 
securing for herself undisputed possession of the upper Niger 
and of the countries lying within the great bend of that river. 



HISTORY] 



AFRICA 



349 



When the British government awoke to the consciousness of 
what was at stake France had obtained too great a start. 
French governors of the Senegal had succeeded, before the Berlin 
conference, in establishing forts on the upper Niger, and the 
advantage thus gained was steadily pursued. Every winter season 
French posts were pushed farther and farther along the river, or 
in the vast regions watered by the southern tributaries of the Sene- 
gal and Niger rivers. This ceaseless activity met with its reward. 
Great Britain found herself compelled to acknowledge accom- 
plished facts and to conclude agreements with France, which 
left her colonies mere coast patches, with a very limited extension 
towards the interior. On the 10th of August 1889 an agreement 
was signed by which the Gambia colony and protectorate was 
confined to a narrow strip of territory on both banks of the river 
for about 200 m. from the sea. In June 1882 and in August 
1889 provisional agreements were made with France fixing the 
western and northern limits of Sierra Leone, and commissioners 
were appointed to trace the line of demarcation agreed upon 
by the two governments. But the commissioners failed to agree, 
and on the 21st of January 1895 a fresh agreement was made, 
the boundary being subsequently traced by a mixed commission. 
Sierra Leone, as now definitely constituted, has a coast-line of 
about 180 m. and a maximum extension towards the interior 
of some 200 m. 

At the date of the Berlin conference the present colonies of 
Southern Nigeria and the Gold Coast constituted a single colony 
under the title of the Gold Coast colony, but on the 13th of 
January 1886 the territory comprised under that title was erected 
into two separate colonies — Lagos and the Gold Coast (the name 
of the former being changed in February 1906 to the colony of 
Southern Nigeria). The coast limits of the new Gold Coast 
colony were declared to extend from 5 W. to 2° E., but these 
limits were subsequently curtailed by agreements with France 
and Germany. The arrangements that fixed the eastern frontier 
of the Gold Coast colony and its hinterland have already been 
stated in connexion with German Togoland. On the western 
frontier it marches with the French colony of the Ivory Coast, 
and in July 1893, after an unsuccessful attempt to achieve the 
same end by an agreement concluded in 1889, the frontier was 
defined from the neighbourhood of the Tano lagoon and river 
of the same name, to the 9th degree of north latitude. In 
August 1896, following the destruction of the Ashanti power 
and the deportation of King Prempeh, as a result of the second 
Ashanti campaign, a British protectorate was declared over the 
whole of the Ashanti territories and a resident was installed at 
Kumasi. But no northern limit had been fixed by the 1893 
agreement beyond the 9th parallel, and the countries to the 
north — Gurunsi (Grusi), Mossi and Gurma — were entered from 
all sides by rival British, French and German expeditions. 
The conflicting claims established by these rival expeditions 
may, however, best be considered in connexion with the struggle 
for supremacy on the middle Niger and in the Chad region, to 
which it is now necessary to turn. 

A few days before the meeting of the Berlin conference Sir 
George Goldie had succeeded in buying up all the French interests 
on the lower Niger. The British company's influence had at 
that date been extended by treaties with the native chiefs up the 
main Niger stream to its junction with the Benue, and some 
distance along this latter river. But the great Fula states of 
the central Sudan were still outside European influence, and this 
fact did not escape attention in Germany. German merchants 
had been settled for some years on the coast, and one of them, 
E. R. Flegel, had displayed great interest in, and activity on, 
the river. He recognized that in the densely populated states 
of the middle Niger, Sokoto and Gando, and in Bornu to the west 
of Lake Chad, there was a magnificent field for Germany's new- 
born eolonizing zeal. The German African Company 1 and the 
German Colonial Society listened eagerly to Flegel's proposals, 
and in April 1885 he left Berlin on a mission to the Fula states 

'This association, formed in 1878 by a union of associations 
primarily intended for the exploration of Africa, ceased to exist in 
1 891. 



of Sokoto and Gando. But it was impossible to keep his inten- 
tions entirely secret, and the (British) National African Company 
had no desire to see the French rivals, whom they had with so 
much difficulty dislodged from the river, replaced by the even 
more troublesome German. Accordingly Joseph Thomson, the 
young Scottish explorer, was sent out to the Niger, and had the 
satisfaction of concluding on the 1st of June 1885 a treaty with 
" Umoru, King of the Mussulmans of the Sudan and Sultan of 
Sokoto," which practically secured the whole of the trading 
rights and the control of the sultan's foreign relations to the 
British company. Thomson concluded a similar treaty with 
the sultan of Gando, so as to provide against the possibility of 
its being alleged that Gando was an independent state and not 
subject to the suzerainty of the sultan of Sokoto. As Thomson 
descended the river with his treaties, he met Flegel going up the 
river, with bundles of German flags and presents for the chiefs. 
The German government continued its efforts to secure a footing 
on the lower Niger until the fall of Prince Bismarck from power 
in March 1890, when opposition ceased, and on the failure of the 
half-hearted attempt made later to establish relations with Gando 
from Togoland, Germany dropped out of the competition for the 
western Sudan and left the field to France and Great Tne Nlger 
Britain. After its first great success the National Company 
African Company renewed its efforts to obtain a granted a 
charter from the British government, and on the 10th c er ' 
of July 1886 the charter was granted, and the company became 
" The Royal Niger Company, chartered and limited." In June 
of the previous year a British protectorate had been proclaimed 
over the whole of the coast from the Rio del Rey to the Lagos 
frontier, and as already stated, on the 13th of January 1886 the 
Lagos settlements had been separated from the Gold Coast and 
erected into a separate colony. It may be convenient to state 
here that the western boundary of Lagos with French territory 
(Dahomey) was determined in the Anglo-French agreement of 
the 10th of August 1889, " as far as the 9th degree of north 
latitude, where it shall stop." Thus both in the Gold Coast 
hinterland and in the Lagos hinterland a door was left wide open 
to the north of the 9th parallel. 

Notwithstanding her strenuous efforts, France, in her advance 
down the Niger from Senegal, did not succeed in reaching Sego 
on the upper Niger, a considerable distance above Timbuktu, 
until the winter of 1890-1891, and the rapid advance of British 
influence up the river raised serious fears lest the Royal Niger 
Company should reach Timbuktu before France could forestall 
her. It was, no doubt, this consideration that induced the 
French government to consent to the insertion in the agreement 
of the 5th of August 1890, by which Great Britain recognized 
France's protectorate over Madagascar, of the following article: 

The Government of Her Britannic Majesty recognizes the sphere 
of influence of France to the south of her Mediterranean possessions 
up to a line from Say on the Niger to Barrua on Lake Chad, drawn 
in such a manner as to comprise in the sphere of action of the Niger 
Company all that fairly belongs to the kingdom of Sokoto ; the line 
to be determined by the commissioners to be appointed. 

The commissioners never were in fact appointed, and the 
proper meaning to be attached to this article subsequently 
became a subject of bitter controversy between the two countries. 
An examination of the map of West Africa will show what possi- 
bilities of trouble were left open at the end of 1890 by the various 
agreements concluded up to that date. From Say on the Niger 
to where the Lagos frontier came to an abrupt stop in 9° N. 
there was no boundary line between the French and British 
spheres of influence. To the north of the Gold Coast and of the 
French Ivory Coast colony the way was equally open to Great 
Britain and to France, while the vagueness of the Say-Barrua 
line left an opening of which France was quick to avail herself. 
Captain P. L. Monteil, who was despatched by the French govern- 
ment to West' Africa in 1890, immediately after the conclusion of 
the August agreement, did not hesitate to pass well to the south 
of the Say-Barrua line, and to attempt to conclude treaties with 
chiefs who were, beyond all question/ within the British sphere. 
Still farther south, on the Benue river, the two expeditions 
of Lieutenant Miaon — in 1890 and 1892 — failed to do any real 



35° 



AFRICA 



[HISTORY 



harm to British interests. In 1892 an event happened which 
had an important bearing on the future course of the dispute. 

After a troublesome war with Behanzin, king of 
advance to ^ e nat i ve state of Dahomey, France annexed some 
Timbuktu, portion of Dahomeyan territory on the coast, and 

declared a protectorate over the rest of the kingdom. 
Thus was removed the barrier which had up to that time 
prevented France from pushing her way Nigerwards from her 
possessions on the Slave Coast, as well as from the upper 
Niger and the Ivory Coast. Henceforth her progress from 
all these directions was rapid, and in particular Timbuktu was 
occupied in the last days of 1893. 

In 1894 it appears to have been suddenly realized in France 
that, for the development of the vast regions which she was 
placing under her protection in West Africa, it was extremely 
desirable that she should obtain free access to the navigable 
portions of the Niger, if not on the left bank, from which she was 
excluded by the Say-Barrua agreement, then on the right bank, 
where the frontier had still to be fixed by international agreement. 
In the neighbourhood of Bussa there is a long stretch of the 
river so impeded by rapids that navigation is practically im- 
possible, except in small boats and at considerable risk. Below 
these rapids France had no foothold on the river, both banks 
from Bussa to the sea being within the»British sphere. In 1890 
the Royal Niger Company had concluded a treaty with the emir 
and chiefs of Bussa (or Borgu); but the French declared that 
the real paramount chief of Borgu was not the king of Bussa, 
but the king of Nikki, and three expeditions were despatched 
in hot haste to Nikki to take the king under French protection. 
Sir George Goldie, however, was not to be baffled. While 
maintaining the validity of the earlier treaty with Bussa, he 
despatched Captain (afterwards General Sir) F. D. Lugard to 
Nikki, and Lugard was successful in distancing all his French 
competitors by several days, reaching Nikki on the 5 th of 
November 1894 and concluding a treaty with the king and 
chiefs. The French expeditions, which were in great strength, 
did not hesitate on their arrival to compel the king to execute 
fresh treaties with France, and with these in their possession 
they returned to Dahomey. Shortly afterwards a fresh act of 
aggression was committed. On the 13th of February 1895 a 
French officer, Commandant Toutee, arrived on the right bank 
of the Niger opposite Bajibo and built a fort. His presence 
there was notified to the Royal Niger Company, who protested 
to the British government against this invasion of their territory. 
Lord Rosebery, who was then foreign minister, at once made 
inquiries in Paris, and received the assurance that Commandant 
Toutee was " a private traveller." Eventually Commandant 
Toutee was ordered to withdraw, and the fort was occupied 
by the Royal Niger Company's troops. Commandant Toutee 
subsequently published the official instructions from the French 
government under which he had acted. It was thought that the 
recognition of the British claims, involved in the withdrawal of 
Commandant Toutee, had marked the final abandonment by 
France of the attempt to establish herself on the navigable 
portions of the Niger below Bussa, but in 1897 the attempt was 
renewed in the most determined manner. In February of that 
year a French force suddenly occupied Bussa, and this act was 
quickly followed by the occupation of Gomba and Illo higher up 
the river. In November 1897 Nikki was occupied. The situation 
on the Niger had so obviously been outgrowing the capacity of a 
chartered company that for some time before these occurrences 
the assumption of responsibility for the whole of the Niger region 
_. by the imperial authorities had been practically de- 

Franco- cided on; and early in 1898 Lugard was sent out to 
British the Niger with a number of imperial officers to raise a 
'//aft?" 1 ' * oca ' f° rce * n preparation for the contemplated change. 

The advance of the French forces from the south and 
west was the signal for an advance of British troops from the 
Niger, from Lagos and from the Gold Coast protectorate. The 
situation thus created was extremely serious. The British and 
French flags were flying in close proximity, in some cases in the 
same village. Meanwhile the diplomatists were busy in London 



and in Paris, and in the latter capital a commission sat for many 
months to adjust the conflicting claims. Fortunately, by the tact 
and forbearance of the officers on both sides, no local incident 
occurred to precipitate a collision, and on the 14th of June 1898 
a convention was signed by Sir Edmund Monson and M. G. 
Hanotaux which practically completed the partition of this part 
of the continent. 

The settlement effected was in the nature of a compromise. 
France withdrew from Bussa, Gomba and Illo, the frontier line 
west of the Niger being drawn from the 9th parallel to a point 
ten miles, as the crow flies, above Giri, the port of Illo. France 
was thus shut out from the navigable portion of the middle and 
lower Niger; but for purely commercial purposes Great Britain 
agreed to lease to France two small plots of land on the river — 
the one on the right bank between Leaba and the mouth of the 
Moshi river, the other at one of the mouths of the Niger. By 
accepting this line Great Britain abandoned Nikki and a great 
part of Borgu as well as some part of Gando to France. East 
of the Niger the Say-Barrua line was modified in favour of 
France, which gained parts of both Sokoto and Bornu where 
they meet the southern edge of the Sahara. In the Gold Coast 
hinterland the French withdrew from Wa, and Great Britain 
abandoned all claim to Mossi, though the capital of the latter 
country, together with a further extensive area in the territory 
assigned to both powers, was declared to be equally free, so far 
as trade and navigation were concerned, to the subjects and 
protected persons of both nationalities. The western boundary 
of the Gold Coast was prolonged along the Black Volta as far 
as latitude ir° N., and this parallel was followed with slight de- 
flexions to the Togoland frontier. In consequence of the acute 
crisis which shortly afterwards occurred between France and 
Great Britain on the upper Nile, the ratification of this agreement 
was delayed until after the conclusion of the Fashoda agreement 
of March 1899 already referred to. In 1900 the two patches on 
the Niger leased to France were selected by commissioners 
representing the two countries, and in the same year the Anglo- 
French frontier from Lagos to the west bank of the Niger was 
delimited. 

East of the Niger the frontier, even as modified in 1898, 
failed to satisfy the French need for a practicable route to Lake 
Chad, and in the convention of the 8th of April 1904, to which 
reference has been made under Egypt and Morocco, it was 
agreed, as part of the settlement of the French shore Further 
question in Newfoundland, to deflect the frontier line con- 
more to the south. The new boundary was described <* s s lons 
at some length, but provision was made for its modifica- 
tion in points of detail on the return of the commissioners engaged 
in surveying the frontier region. In 1906 an agreement was 
reached on all points, and the frontier at last definitely settled, 
sixteen years after the Say-Barrua line had been fixed. This 
revision of the Niger-Chad frontier did not, however, represent 
the only territorial compensation received by France in West 
Africa in connexion with the settlement of the Newfoundland 
question. By the same convention of April 1904 the British 
government consented to modify the frontier between Senegal 
and the Gambia colony " so as to give to France Yarbutenda 
and the lands and lar.ding-places belonging to that locality," 
and further agreed to cede to France the tiny group of islands 
off the coast of French Guinea known as the Los Islands. 

Meantime the conclusion of the 1898 convention had left 
both the British and the French governments free to devote 
increased attention to the subdivision and control of their West 
African possessions. On the 1st of January 1900 the imperial 
authorities assumed direct responsibility for the whole of the 
territories of the Royal Niger Company, which became henceforth 
a purely commercial undertaking. The Lagos protectorate was 
extended northwards; the Niger Coast protectorate, likewise 
with extended frontiers, became Southern Nigeria; while the 
greater part of the territories formerly administered by the 
company were constituted into the protectorate of Northern 
Nigeria — all three administrations being directly under the 
Colonial Office. In February J906 the administration of the 



HISTORY] 



AFRICA 



35* 



Organiza- 
tion of the 
British 
and 
French 
pro- 
tectorate*. 



African 
Wanda. 



Southern Nigerian protectorate was placed under that of Lagos 
at the same time as the name of the latter was changed to the 
Colony of Southern Nigeria, this being a step towards the eventual 
amalgamation of all three dependencies under one 
governor or governor-general. In French West Africa 
changes in the internal frontiers have been numerous 
and important. The coast colonies have all been in- 
creased in size at the expense of the French Sudan, 
which has vanished from the maps as an administrative 
entity. There are carved out of the territories com- 
prised in what is officially known as French West Africa five 
colonies — Senegal, French Guinea, the Ivory Coast, Dahomey 
and the Upper Senegal and Niger, this last being entirely cut off 
from the sea — and the civil territory of Mauritania. To the col- 
ony of the Upper Senegal and Niger is attached the military 
territory of the Niger, embracing the French Sahara up to the limit 
of the Algerian sphere of influence. Not only are all these divisions 
of French West Africa connected territorially, but administra- 
tively they are united under a governor-general. Similarly the 
French Congo territories have been divided into three colonies — 
the Gabun, the Middle Congo and the Ubangi-Shari-Chad — all 
united administratively under a commissioner-general. 

There are, around the coast, numerous islands or groups of 
islands, which are regarded by geographers as outliers of the 
Ownership African mainland. The majority of these African 
of the islands 'were occupied by one or other of the European 
powers long before the period of continental partition. 
The Madeira Islands to the west of Morocco, the 
Bissagos Islands, off the Guinea coast, and Prince's Island and 
St Thomas' Island, in the Gulf of Guinea, are Portuguese posses- 
sions of old standing; while in the Canary Islands and Fernando 
Po Spain possesses remnants of her ancient colonial empire which 
are a more valuable asset than any she has acquired in recent 
times on the mainland. St Helena in the Atlantic, Mauritius 
and some small groups north of Madagascar in the Indian Ocean, 
are British possessions acquired long before the opening of the 
last quarter of the 19th century. Zanzibar, Pemba and some 
smaller islands which the sultan was allowed to retain were, as 
has already been stated, placed under British protection in 1890, 
and the island of Sokotra was placed under the " gracious favour 
and protection " of Great Britain on the 23rd of April 1886. 
France's ownership of Reunion dates back to the 17th century, 
but the Comoro archipelago was not placed under French protec- 
tion until April 1886. None of these islands, with the exception 
of the Zanzibar group, have, however, materially affected the 
partition of the continent, and they need not be enumerated in the 
table which follows. But the important island of Madagascar 
stands in a different category, both on account of its size and 
because it was during the period under review that it passed 
through the various stages which led to its becoming a French 
colony. The first step was the placing of the foreign relations of 
the island under French control, which was effected by the treaty 
of the 17th of December 1885, after the Franco-Malagasy war 
that had broken out in 1883. In 1890 Great Britain and Germany 
recognized a French protectorate over the island, but the Hova 
government declined to acquiesce in this view, and in May 1895 
France sent an expedition to enforce her claims. The capital was . 
occupied on the 30th of September in the same year, and on the 
day following Queen Ranavalona signed a convention recogniz- 
ing the French protectorate. In January 1896 the island was 
declared a French possession, and on the 6th of August was 
declared to be a French colony. In February 1897 the last 
vestige of ancient rule was swept away by the deportation of 
the queen. 

Thus in its broad outlines the partition of Africa was begun and 
ended in the short space of a quarter of a century. There are 
still many finishing touches to be put to the structure. The 
southern frontiers of Morocco and Tripoli remain undefined, 
while the mathematical lines by which the spheres of influence 
of the powers were separated one from the other are being 
variously modified on the do ut des principle as they come to be 
surveyed and as the effective occupation of the continent pro- 



gresses. Much labour is necessary before the actual area of 
Africa and its subdivisions can be accurately determined, but in 
the following table the figures are at least approximately correct. 
Large areas of the spheres assigned to different European 
powers have still to be brought under European control; but 
this work is advancing by rapid strides. 

British— Sq. m. 

Cape Colony 276,995 

Natal and Zt'luland 35,371 

Basutoland 10,293 

Bechuanaland Protectorate 225,000 

Transvaal and Swaziland 117,732 

Orange River Colony 50,392 



Rhodesia 



450,000 



Nyasaland Protectorate 43,608 

British East Africa Protectorate 240,000 

Uganda Protectorate 125,000 

Zanzibar Protectorate 1,020 

Somaliland 68,000 

Northern Nigeria 258,000 

Southern Nigeria (colony and protectorate) . . 80,000 

Gold Coast and hinterland 82,000 

Sierre Leone (colony and protectorate) 



Gambia 



Total British Africa 



34,000 
4,000 

2,101,411 



Egypt and Libyan Desert 650,000 

Anglo-Egyptian Sudan 950,000 

1,600,000 



945.O00 
51,000 



French — 

Algeria and Algerian Sahara 

Tunisia 

French West Africa — 

Senegal 

French Guinea 

Ivory Coast 

Dahomey . 

Upper Senegal and Niger, and Maur- 
itania (including French West 
African Sahara) . . . 1,581,000 1,931,000 

French Congo 700,000 

French Somaliland 12,000 

Madagascar . , 227,950 



74,000 
107,000 
129,000 

40,000 



Total French Africa 



3,866,950 



German — 

East Africa 364,000 

South-West Africa . . . . . . . . 322,450 

Cameroon 190,000 

Togoland 33,700 



Total German Africa 



910,150 



Italian — 

Eritrea 60,000 

Italian Somaliland 140,000 

Total Italian Africa .... 200,000 



Portuguese— 

Guinea 14,000 

West Africa 480,000 

East Africa 293,500 



Total Portuguese Africa 



Spanish — 

Rio de Oro . . . 
Muni River Settlements 



Total Spanish Africa 



787,500 



70,000 
9,800 

79,800 



Belgian— 

Congo State 900,000 



Turkish — 

Tripoli and Benghazi 400,000 

Separate States — 

Liberia 43,000 

Morocco 220,000 

Abyssinia 350,000 



Total Independent Africa 



613,000 



352 



AFRICA 



[EXPLORATION 



Thus, collecting the totals, the result of the " scramble " 
has been to divide Africa among the powers as follows: — 

Sq. m. 

British Africa 2,101,411 

Egyptian Africa 1,600,000 

French Africa 3,866,950 

German Africa 910,150 

Italian Africa 200,000 

Portuguese Africa 787,500 

Spanish Africa 79, 800 

Belgian Africa 900,000 

Turkish Africa 400,000 

Independent Africa 613,000 



11,458,811 



Q. S. K.) 
VI. Exploration and Survey since 1875 

In giving the history of the partition of the continent, the later 
work of exploration, except where, as in the case of de Brazza's 
expeditions, it had direct political consequences, has of necessity 
not been told. The results achieved during and after the period 
of partition may now be indicated. Stanley's great journey down 
the Congo in 1875-1876 initiated a new era in African explora- 
tion. The numbers of travellers soon became so great that the 
once marvellous feat of crossing the continent from sea to sea 
became common. With increased knowledge and much ampler 
means of communication trans-African travel now presents few 
difficulties. While d'Anville and other cartographers of the 18th 
century, by omitting all that was uncertain, had left a great 
blank on the map, the work accomplished since 1875 has filled it 
with authentic topographical details. Moreover surveys of high 
accuracy have been made at several points. As the work of 
exploration and survey progressed journeys of startling novelty 
became impossible — save in the eastern Sahara, where the 
absence of water and boundless wastes of sand render exploration 
more difficult, perhaps, than in any other region of the globe. 
Within their respective spheres of influence each power undertook 
detailed surveys, and the most solid of the latest accessions to 
knowledge have resulted from the labours of hard-working 
colonial officials toiling individually in obscurity. Their work it 
is impossible here to recognize adequately; the following lines 
record only the more obvious achievements. 

The relations of the Congo basin to the neighbouring river 
systems was brought out by the journeys of many travellers. 
In 1877 an important expedition was sent out by the Portu- 
guese government under Serpa Pinto, Brito Capello and Roberto 
Ivens for the exploration of the interior of Angola. 
jy*"* '" The first named made his way by the head-streams of 
basin. the Kubango to the upper Zambezi, which he descended 
to the Victoria Falls, proceeding thence to Pretoria 
and Durban. Capello and Ivens confined their attention to the 
south-west Congo basin, where they disproved the existence of 
Lake Aquilunda, which had figured on the maps of that region 
since the 16th century. In a later journey (i884-i885)Capelloand 
Ivens crossed the continent from Mossamedes to the mouth of the 
Zambezi, adding considerably to the knowledge of the border- 
lands between the upper Congo and the upper Zambezi. More 
important results were obtained by the German travellers Paul 
Pogge and Hermann von Wissmann, who (1880-1882) passed 
through previously unknown regions beyond Muata Yanvo's 
kingdom, and reached the upper Congo at Nyangwe, whence 
Wissmann made his way to the east coast. In 1884-1885 a 
German expedition under Wissmann solved the most important 
geographical problem relating to the southern Congo basin by 
descending the Kasai, the largest southern tributary, which, con- 
trary to expectation, proved to unite with the Kwango and other 
streams before joining the main river. Further additions to the 
knowledge of the Congo tributaries were made at the same time by 
the Rev. George Grenfell, a Baptist missionary, who (accompanied 
in 1885 by K. von Francois) made several voyages in the steamer 
" Peace," especially up the great Ubangi, ultimately proved to be 
the lower course of the Welle, discovered in i87obySchweinfurth. 



In East as in West Africa operations were started by agents of 
the Belgian committee, but with less success than on the Congo. 
The first new journey of importance on this side was 
made (1878-1880) on behalf of the British African Ex- "^"f 
plo ration Committee by Joseph Thomson, who after the Africa. 
death of his leader, Keith Johnston, made his way from 
the coast to the north end of Nyasa, thence to Tanganyika, on 
both sides of which he broke new ground, sighting the north end 
of Lake Rukwa on the east. In 1882-1884 the French naval 
lieutenant Victor Giraud proceeded by the north of Nyasa to 
Lake Bangweulu, of which he made the first fairly correct map. 
North of the Zanzibar-Tanganyika route a large area of new ground 
was opened in 1 883-1 884 by Joseph Thomson, who traversed 
the whole length of the Masai country to Lake Baringo and 
Victoria Nyanza, shedding the first clear light on the great East 
African rift- valley and neighbouring highlands, including Mounts 
Kenya and Elgon. A great advance in the region between 
Victoria Nyanza and Abyssinia was made in 1887-1889 by the 
Austrians, Count Samuel Teleki and Lieut. Ludwig von Hohnel, 
who discovered the large Basso Norok, now known as Lake 
Rudolf, till then only vaguely indicated on the map as Samburu. 
At this time Somaliland was being opened up by English and 
Italian travellers. In 1883 the brothers F. L, and W. D. James 
penetrated from Berbera to the Webi Shebeli; in 1892 Vittorio 
Bottego (afterwards murdered in the Abyssinian highlands) 
started from Berbera and reached the upper Juba, which he 
explored to its source. The first person, however, to cross from 
the Gulf of Aden to the Indian Ocean was an American, 
A. Donaldson Smith, who in 1 894-1 895 explored the head- 
streams of the Webi Shebeli and also explored the Omo, the 
feeder of Lake Rudolf. 

In the region north-west of Victoria Nyanza the greatest 
additions to geographical knowledge were made by H. M. Stanley 
in his last expedition, undertaken for the relief of Emin Pasha. 
The expedition set out in 1887 by way of the Congo to carry 
supplies to the governor of the old Egyptian Equatorial province. 
The route lay up the Aruwimi, the principal tributary of the 
Congo from the north-east, by which the expedition made its way, 
encountering immense difficulties, through the great equatorial 
forest, the character and extent of which were thus for the first 
time brought to light. The return was made to the east coast, 
and resulted in the discovery of the great snowy range of Ruwen- 
zori or Runsoro, and the confirmation of the existence of a third 
Nile lake discharging its waters into the Albert Nyanza by the 
Semliki river. A further discovery was that of a large bay, 
hitherto unsuspected, forming the south-west corner of the 
Victoria Nyanza. 

Great activity was also displayed in completing the work 
of earlier explorers in North and West Africa. Morocco was in 
1883-1884 the scene of important explorations by 
de Foucauld, a Frenchman who, disguised as a Jew, tioasln 
crossed and re-crossed the Atlas and supplied the North and 
first trustworthy information as to the orography of YfJ* 
many parts of the chain. In 1887-1889 Louis Gustave 
Binger, a French officer, made a great journey through the countries 
enclosed in the Niger bend, and in 1890-1892 Col. P. F. Monteil 
went from St Louis to Say, on the Niger, thence through Sokoto 
to Bornu and Lake Chad, whence he crossed the Sahara to 
Tripoli. Meantime explorers had been busy in the region 
between Lake Chad, the Gulf of Guinea and the Congo. The 
Sanga, one of the principal northern tributaries of the Congo, 
was reached from the north by Lieut. Louis Mizon, a French 
naval officer, who drew the first line of communication between 
the Benue and the Congo (1890-1892). In 1890 Paul Crampel, 
who in the previous year had explored north of the Ogowe, 
undertook a great expedition from the Ubangi to the Shari, 
but was attacked and killed, with several of his companions, on 
the borders of the Bagirmi. Several other expeditions followed, 
and in 1896 Emile Gentil reached the Shari, launched a steamer 
on its waters and pushed on to Lake Chad. Early in 1900 Lake 
Chad was also reached by F. Foureau, a French traveller, who 
had already devoted twelve years to the exploration of the 



EXPLORATION] 



AFRICA 



353 



torial 
Africa. 



Sahara and who on this occasion had crossed the desert from 
Algeria and had reached the lake via Air and Zinder. 

The last ten years of the 19th century also witnessed many 
interesting expeditions in east Central Africa. In 1891 Emin 
Lakes and I >as ' la > accompanied by Dr F. Stuhlmann, made his 
mountains way south of Victoria Nyanza to the western Nile 
ofEqua- lakes, visiting for the first time the southern and 
western shores of Albert Edward. Stuhlmann also 
ascended the Ruwenzori range to a height of over 
13,000 ft. Inthe same year Dr O. Baumann, who had already 
done good work in Usambara, near the coast, started on a more 
extended journey through the region of steppes between Kili- 
manjaro and Victoria Nyanza, afterwards exploring the head- 
streams of the Kagera, the ultimate sources of the Nile. In the 
steppe region referred to he discovered two new lakes, Manyara 
and Eiassi, occupying parts of the East African valley system. 
This region was again traversed in 1893-1894 by Count von 
Gotzen, who continued his route westwards to Lake Kivu, north 
of Tanganyika, which, though heard of by Speke over thirty years 
before, had never yet been visited. He also reached for the first 
time the line of volcanic peaks north of Kivu, one of which he 
ascended, afterwards crossing the great equatorial forest by a 
new route to the Congo and the west coast. Valuable scientific 
work was done in 1893 by Dr J. W. Gregory, who ascended 
Mount Kenya to a height of 16,000 ft. In 1893^1894 Scott 
Elliot reached Rnwenzori by way of Uganda, returning by 
Tanganyika and Nyasa, and in 1896 C. W. Hobley made the 
circuit of the great mountain Elgon, north-east of Victoria 
Nyanza. In 1899 Mount Kenya was ascended to its summit 
by a party under H. J. Mackinder. The exploration of Mount 
Kilimanjaro has been the special work of Dr Hans Meyer, who 
first directed his attention to it in 1887. 

The region south of Abyssinia proper and north of Lake 
Rudolf, being largely the basin of the Sobat tributary of the Nile, 
was traversed by several explorers, among whom maybe men- 
tioned Capt. M. S. Wellby, who in 1898-1899 explored the chain 
of small lakes in south-east Abyssinia, pushed on to Lake 
Rudolf, and thence traversed hitherto unknown country to the 
lower Sobat. Donaldson Smith crossed from Berbera to the 
Nile by Lake Rudolf in 1899-1900, and Major H. H. Austin com- 
manded two survey parties between the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan 
and Lake Rudolf during 1899-1901. Meantime in south Central 
Africa the Barotse country had been partly made known by the 
missionary F. Coillard, who settled there in 1884, while the 
middle and upper Zambezi basin were scientifically explored 
and mapped by Major A. St H. Gibbons and his assistants 
in 1S95-1896 and 1898-1900. In the same period the Congo- 
Zambezi watershed was traced by a Belgian officer, Capt. C. 
Lemaire, who had ascended one of the upper tributaries of 
the Kasai. 

In the early years of the 19th century the first recorded 
crossing of Africa took place. That crossing and all subsequent 
crossings had been made either from west to east or east to west. 
The first journey through the whole length of the continent 
was accomplished in the two last years of the century when a 
young Englishman, E. S. Grogan, starting from Cape Town 
reached the Mediterranean by way of the Zambezi, the central 
line of lakes and the Nile. Other travellers followed in Grogan's 
footsteps, among the first, Major Gibbons. 

Additions to topographical knowledge were made from about 
1890 onwards by the international commissions which traced 
the frontiers of the protectorates of the European 
On several occasions the labours of the 



Work or 

inter- powers. 

national commissions disclosed errors of importance in the 

commis- maps upon which international agreements had been 

slonsand 

surveying 



based. Among those which yielded valuable results 
parties. were the Anglo-French commission which in 1903 

traced the Nigerian frontier from the Niger to Lake 
Chad, and the Anglo-German commission which in 1903-1904 
fixed the Cameroon boundary between Yola, on the Benue, and 
Lake Chad. These expeditions and French surveys in the same 
region during 190 2-1903 resulted in the discovery that Lake Chad 

I. 12 



had greatly decreased in area since the middle of the 19th 
century. In 1903 a French officer, Capt. E. Lenfant, succeeded 
in establishing the fact of a connexion between the Niger and 
Chad basins. Subsequently Lenfant explored the western 
basin of the Shari, determining (1907) the true upper branch 
of that river. ...... 

In East Africa a German-Congolese commission surveyed 
(1901-1902) Lake Kivu and the volcanic region north of the 
lake, R. Kandt making a special study of Kivu and the 
Kagera sources, while the Anglo-German boundary commission of 
1 902-1904 surveyed the valley of the lower Kagera, and fixed the 
exact position of Albert Edward Nyanza. Much new information 
concerning the border Jands of British East Africa and Abyssinia 
between Lake Rudolf and the lower Juba was obtained by the 
survey executed in 1902-1903 by a British officer, Captain P. 
Maud. 

While political requirements led to the exact determination 
of frontiers, administrative needs forced the governments 
concerned to take in hand the survey of the countries under 
their protection. Before the close of the first decade of the 
20th century tolerably accurate maps had been made of the 
German colonies, of a considerable part of West Africa, the 
Algerian Sahara and the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan, mainly by 
military officers. A British naval officer, Commander B. 
Whitehouse, mapped the entire coastline of Victoria Nyanza. 
Government and railway surveys apart, the chief points of 
interest for explorers during 1 904-1906 were the Ruwenzori range 
and the connexion of the basin of Lake Chad with the Niger and 
Congo systems. Lieut. Boyd Alexander was the leader of a 
party which during the years named surveyed Lake Chad and a 
considerable part of eastern Nigeria, returning to England via 
the Shari, the Ubangi and the Nile. Two members of the party, 
Capt. Claud Alexander and Capt. G. B. Gosling, died during the 
expedition. The Ruwenzori Mountains proved a great source 
of attraction. Sir H. H. Johnston had in 1900 ascended beyond 
the snow-line to 14,800 ft.; in 1903 Dr J. J. David had reached 
from the west to a height he believed to exceed 16,000 ft. ; and 
in the same year Capt. T. T. Behrens, of the Anglo-German 
Uganda boundary commission, fixed the highest summit at 
16,619 ft. During 1904-1906 some half-dozen expeditions were 
at work in the region. That of the duke of the Abruzzi was the 
most successful. In the summer of 1906 the duke or members 
of his party climbed all the highest peaks, none of which reaches 
17,000 ft., and determined the main lines of the watershed. 
Major Powell-Cotton, a British officer who had previously done 
good work in Abyssinia and British East Africa, spent 1905- 
1906 in a detailed examination of the Ladp enclave and the 
country west of Ruwenzori and Albert and Albert Edward lakes. 
This expedition was specially fruitful in additions to zoological 
knowledge. 

Archaeological research, stimulated by the reports of Thomas 
Shaw, British consular chaplain at Algiers in 1719-1731, by James 
Bruce's exploration; 1765-1767, of the ruins in Barbary, and by 
the French conquest of Egypt in 1798, has been systematically 
carried out in North Africa since the middle of the 19th century 
(see Egypt and Africa, Roman). In South Africa the first 
thorough examination of the ruins in Rhodesia was made in 
1905, when Randall-Maclver demonstrated that the great 
Zimbabwe and similar buildings were of medieval or post- 
medieval origin. (F. R. C.) 

VII. Social and Economic Conditions 
The eagerness with which the nations of western Europe 
partitioned Africa between them was due, as has been seen, more 
to the necessities of commerce than to mere land hunger. Yet, 
except in the north and south temperate regions, the commercial 
intercourse of the continent with the rest of the world had been 
until the closing years of the 19th century of insignificant pro- 
portions. In addition to slaves, furnished by the continent from 
the earliest times, a certain amount of gold and ivory was ex- 
ported from the tropical regions, but no other product supplied 
the material for a flourishing trade with those parts. To their 

11 



354 



AFRICA 



[ECONOMICS 



Asiatic and European invaders the Africans indeed owed many- 
creature comforts — the introduction of maize, rice, the sugar 
cane, the orange, the lemon and the lime, cloves, tobacco and 
many other vegetable products, the camel, the horse and other 
animals — but invaluable to Africa as were these gifts they led 
to little development of commerce. The continent- continued 
in virtual isolation from the great trade movements of the 
world, an isolation due not so much to its poverty in 
Isolation. na tural resources, as to the special circumstances which 
likewise caused so large a part of the continent to 
remain so long a terra incognita. The principal drawbacks may 
be summarized as: (i) the absence of means of communication 
with the interior; (2) the unheal thiness of the coast-lands;' (3) 
the small productive activity of the natives; (4) the effects of the 
slave trade in discouraging legitimate commerce. None of these 
causes is necessarily permanent, that most difficult to remove 
being the third; the negro races finding the means of existence 
easy have little incentive to toil. The first drawback has almost 
disappeared, and the building of railways and the placing of 
steamers on the rivers and lakes — a work continually progressing 
—renders it year by year easier for producer and consumer to 
come together. As to the second drawback, while the coast-lands 
in the tropics will always remain comparatively unhealthy, 
improved sanitation' and the destruction of the malarial mosquito 
have rendered tolerable to Europeans regions formerly notorious 
for their deadly climate. 

At various periods since the. partition of the continent began, 
united action has been taken by the powers of Europe in the 
interests of African trade. The Berlin conference of 1884-1885 
decreed freedom of navigation and trade on the Congo and the 
Niger, and the Anglo-Portuguese treaty of 1891 secured like 
privileges for the Zambezi. The Berlin conference likewise 
enacted that over a wide area of Central Africa — the conventional 
basin of the Congo — there should be complete freedom of trade, a 
freedom which later on was held to be infringed in the Congo 
State and French Congo by the granting to various companies 
proprietary rights in the disposal of the product of the soil. More 
important in their effect on the economic condition of the con- 
tinent than the steps taken to ensure freedom of trade were the 
measures concerted by the powers for the suppression of the slave 
trade. The British government had for long borne the greater 
part of the burden of combating the slave trade on the east coast 
of Africa and in the Indian Ocean, but the changed conditions 
which resulted from the appearance of other European powers in 
Africa induced Lord Salisbury, then foreign secretary, to address, 
in the autumn of 1888, an invitation to the king of the Belgians 
to take the initiative in inviting a conference of the powers at 
Brussels to concert measures for " the gradual suppression of the 
Suppres- s l ave trade on the continent of Africa, and the im- 
sioaof mediate closing of all the external markets which it 
the slave still supplies." The conference assembled in November 
trade - 1889, and on the 2nd of July 1890 a general act was 

signed subject to the ratification of the various governments 
represented, ratification taking place subsequently at different 
dates, and in the case of France with certain reservations. The 
general act began with a declaration of the means which the 
powers were of opinion might be most effectually adopted for 
" putting an end to the crimes and devastations engendered by 
the traffic in African slaves, protecting effectively the aboriginal 
populations of Africa, and ensuring for that vast continent the 
benefits of peace and civilization." It proceeded to lay down 
certain rules and regulations of a practical character on the lines 
suggested. The act covers a wide field, and includes no fewer 
than a hundred separate articles. It established a zone "between 
the 20th parallel of north latitude, and the 22nd parallel of south 
latitude, and extending westward to the Atlantic and eastward 
to the Indian Ocean and its dependencies, comprising the islands 
adjacent to the coast as far as 100 nautical miles from the shore," 
within which the importation of firearms and ammunition was 
forbidden except in certain specified cases, and within which also 
the powers undertook either to prohibit altogether the importa- 
tion and manufacture of spirituous liquors, or to impose duties 



not below an agreed-on minimum. 1 An elaborate series of rules 
was framed for the prevention of the transit of slaves by sea, the 
conditions on which European powers were to grant to natives 
the right to fly the flag of the protecting power, and regulating the 
procedure connected with the right of search on vessels flying a 
foreign flag. The Brussels Act was in effect a joint declaration 
by the signatory powers of their joint and several responsibility 
towards the African native, and notwithstanding the fact that 
many of its articles have proved difficult, if not impossible, of 
enforcement, the solemn engagement taken by Europe in the face 
of the world has undoubtedly exercised a material influence on 
the action of several of the powers. Moreover, with the increase 
of means of communication and the extension of effective 
European control, slave-raiding in the interior was largely checked 
and inter-tribal wars prevented, the natives being thus given 
security in the pursuit of trade and agriculture. 

Other important factors in the economic as well as the social 
conditions of Africa are the advance in civilization made by the 
natives in several regions and the increase of the areas found 
suitable for white colonization. The advance in civilization 
among the natives, exemplified by the granting to them of 
political rights in such countries as Algeria and Cape Colony, 
leads directly to increased commercial activity; and commerce 
increases in a much greater degree when new countries— e.g. 
Rhodesia and British East Africa — become the homes of Euro- 
peans. Finally, in reviewing the chief factors which govern the 
commercial development of the continent, note must be taken of 
the sparsity of the population over the greater part of Africa, and 
the efforts made to supplement the insufficient and often in- 
effective native labour by the introduction of Asiatic labourers 
in various districts — of Indian coolies in Natal and elsewhere, and 
of Chinese for the gold mines of the Transvaal. 

The resources of Africa may be considered under the head of: 
(1) jungle products; (2) cultivated products; (3) animal pro- 
ducts; (4) minerals. Of the first named the most 
important are india-rubber and palm-oil, which in chlef , 

■ 1 a r • 1 1 ~ r . 1 • • 1 economic 

tropical Africa supply by far the largest items in the resources. 

export list. The rubber-producing plants are found 

throughout the Whole tropical belt, and the most important are 

creepers of the order Apocynaceae, especially various species of 

Landolphia (with which genus Vakea is now united). In East 

Africa Landolphia kirkii (Dyer) supplies the largest amount, 

though various other species are known. Forms of apparently 

wider distribution are!,, hendelotii, which is found in the Bahr-el- 

Ghazal, and extends right across the continent to Senegambia; 

and L. (formerly Vahea) comorensis, which, including its variety 

L. florida, has the widest distribution of all the species, occurring 

in Upper and Lower Guinea, the whole of Central Africa, the 

east coast, the Comoro Islands and Madagascar. In parts of 

East Africa Clitandra orientalis is a valuable rubber vine. In 

Lagos and elsewhere rubber is produced by the apocynaceous 

tree, Funtumia elastica, and in West Africa generally by various 

species of Ficus, some species of which are also found in East 

Africa. The rubber produced is somewhat inferior to that of 

South America, but this is largely due to careless methods of 

preparation. The great destruction of vines brought about by 

native methods of collection much reduced the supply in some 

districts, and rendered it necessary to take steps to preserve and 

cultivate the rubber-yielding plants. This has been done in 

many districts with usually encouraging results. Experiments 

have been made in the introduction of South American rubber 

plants, but opinions differ as to the prospects of success, as the 

plants in question seem to demand very definite conditions of 

soil and climate. The second product, palm-oil, is derived from 

a much more limited area than rubber, for although the oil palm 

is found throughout the greater part of West Africa, from io° N. 

to 10° S., the great bulk of the export comes from the coast 

districts at the head of the Gulf of Guinea. A larger supply, 

1 Further conferences respecting the liquor traffic in Africa were 
held in Brussels in 1899 and 1906. In both instances conventions 
were signed by the powers, raising the minimum duty on imported 
spirituous liquors. 



ECONOMICS] 



AFRICA 



355 



equal to any market demand, could easily be obtained. A third 
valuable product is the timber supplied by the forest regions, 
principally in West Africa. It includes African teak or oak 
(Oldfieldia africana), excellent for shipbuilding; the durable 
odum of the Gold Coast (Chlorophora excelsa) ; African mahogany 
(Khaya senegalensis) ; ebony (Diospyros ebenum); camwood 
(Baphia nitida) ; and many other ornamental and dye woods. 
The timber industry on the west coast was long neglected, but 
since 1898 there have been large exports to Europe. In parts of 
East Africa the Podocarpus milanjianus, a conifer, is economically 
important. Valuable timber grows too in South Africa, including 
the yellow wood {Podocarpus), stinkwood (Oco(ea), sneezewood or 
Cape ebony (Euclea) and ironwood. 

Other vegetable products of importance are: Gum arabic, 
obtained from various species of acacia (especially A. Senegal), 
the chief supplies of which are obtained from Senegambia and the 
steppe regions of North Africa (Kordofan, &c); gum copal, a 
valuable resin produced by trees of the leguminous order, the 
best, known as Zanzibar or Mozambique copal, coming from the 
East African Trachylobium hornemannianum, and also found in 
a fossil state under the soil; kola nuts, produced chiefly in the 
coast-lands of Upper Guinea by a tree of the order Sterculiaceae 
(Kola acuminata); archil or orchilla, a dye-yielding lichen 
(Rocella tinctoria and triciformis) growing on trees and rocks in 
East Africa, the Congo basin, &c; cork, the bark of the cork oak, 
which flourishes in Algeria; and alfa, a grass used in paper manu- 
facture (Machrochloa tenacissima), growing in great abundance 
on the dry steppes of Algeria, Tripoli, &c. A product to which 
attention has been paid in Angola is the Almeidina gum or resin, 
derived from the juice of Euphorbia tirucalli. 

The cultivated products include those of the tropical and 
warm temperate zones. Of the former, coffee is perhaps the 
most valuable indigenous plant. It grows wild in many parts, 
the home of one species being in Kaffa and other Galla countries 
south of Abyssinia, and of another in Liberia. The Abyssinian 
coffee is equal to the best produced in any other part of the world. 
Cultivation is, however, necessary to ensure the best results, 
and attention has been given to this in various European colonies. 
Plantations have been established in Angola, Nyasaland, German 
East Africa, Cameroon, the Congo Free State, &c. 

Copra, the produce of the cocoa-nut palm, is supplied chiefly 
by Zanzibar and neighbouring parts of the east coast. Ground- 
nuts, produced by the leguminous plant, Arachis hypogaea, are 
grown chiefly in West Africa, and the largest export is from 
Senegal and the Gambia; while Bambarra ground-nuts (Voand- 
zeia subterranea) are very generally cultivated from Guinea to 
Natal. Cloves are extensively grown on Zanzibar and Pemba 
islands, Pemba being the chief source of the world's supply of 
cloves. The chief drawbacks to the industry are the fluctuations 
of the yield of the trees, and the risk of over-production in good 
seasons. 

Cotton grows wild in many parts of tropical Africa, and is 
exported in small quantities in the raw state; but the main 
export is from Egypt, which comes third among the world's 
sources of supply of the article. It is also cultivated in West 
Africa — the industry in the Guinea coast colonies having been 
developed since the beginning of the 20th century — and in the 
Anglo-Egyptian Sudan, whence came the plants from which 
Egyptian cotton is grown. Sugar, which is the staple crop of 
Mauritius, and in a lesser degree of Reunion, is also produced in 
Natal, Egypt, and, to a certain extent, in Mozambique. Dates 
are grown in Tunisia and the Saharan oases, especially Tafilet; 
maize in Egypt, South Africa and parts of the tropical zone; 
wheat in Egypt, Algeria and the higher regions of Abyssinia; 
rice in Madagascar. Wine is largely exported from Algeria, 
and in a much smaller quantity from Cape Colony; fruit and 
vegetables from Algeria. Tobacco is widely grown on a small 
scale, but, except perhaps from Algeria, has not become an 
important article of export, though plantations have been 
established in various tropical colonies. The cultivation of 
cocoa has proved successful in the Gold Coast, Cameroon and 
other colonies, and in various districts the tea plant is cultivated. 



Indigo, though not originally an African product, has become 
naturalized and grows wild in many parts, while it is also culti- 
vated on a small scale. The main difficulty in the way of tropical 
cultivation is the labour question, which lias already been 
referred to. 

Of animal products one of the most important is ivory, the 
largest export of which is from the Congo Free State. The 
diminution in the number of elephants with the opening up of 
the remoter districts must in time cause a falling-off in this 
export. Beeswax is obtained from various parts of the interior 
of West Africa, and from Madagascar. Raw hides are exported 
in large quantities from South Africa, as are also the wool and 
hair of the merino sheep and Angora goat. Both hides and wool 
are also exported from Algeria and Morocco, and hides from 
Abyssinia and Somaliland. Ostrich feathers are produced 
chiefly by the ostrich farms of Cape Colony, but some are also 
obtained from the steppes to the north of the Central Sudan. 
Live stock, principally sheep, is exported from Algeria and cattle 
from Morocco. 

The exploited minerals of Africa are confined to a few districts, 
the resources of the continent in this respect being largely 
undeveloped. Since the discovery of gold in the 
Transvaal, particularly in the district known as the wealth. 
Rand (1885), the output has grown enormously, so 
that in 1898 the output of gold from South Africa was greater 
than from any other gold-field in the world. The Anglo-Boer 
War of 1899-1902 lost the Rand the leading position, but by 
1905 the output — in that year over £20,800,000 — was greater 
than it had ever been. The supply of gold from South Africa 
is roughly 25% of the world's output. The gold-yielding 
formations extend northwards through Rhodesia. The Gold 
Coast is so named from the quantity of gold obtained there, and 
since the close of the 19th century the industry has developed 
largely in the hands of Europeans. In the Galla countries gold 
has long been an article of native commerce. It is also found 
in various parts of the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan and along the 
western shore of the Red Sea. Diamonds are found in large 
quantities in a series of beds known as the Kimberley shales, 
the principal mines being at Kimberley, Cape Colony. Diamonds 
are also found in Orange River Colony, while one of the richest 
diamond mines in the world — the Premier — is situated in 
the Transvaal near Pretoria. Some 80% of the world's pro- 
duction of diamonds comes from South Africa. Copper is found 
in the west of Cape Colony, in German South- West Africa, and 
in the Katanga country in the southern Congo basin, where vast 
beds of copper ore exist. There are also extensive deposits of 
copper in the Broken Hill district of Northern Rhodesia. It 
also occurs in Morocco, Algeria, the Bahr-el-Ghazal, &c. Rich 
tin deposits have been found in the southern Congo basin and 
in Northern Rhodesia. Iron is found, in Morocco, Algeria 
(whence there is an export trade), and is widely diffused, and 
worked by the natives, in the tropical zone. But the deposits 
are generally not rich. Coal is worked, principally for home con- 
sumption, in Cape Colony, Natal, the Transvaal, Orange River 
Colony, and in Rhodesia in the neighbourhood of the Zambezi. 
Coal deposits also exist in the German territory north of Lake 
Nyasa. Phosphates are exported from Algeria and Tunisia. 
Of other minerals which occur, but are little worked, zinc, lead 
and antimony are found in Algeria, lead and manganese in Cape 
Colony, plumbago in Sierra Leone. 

The imports from foreign countries into Africa consist chiefly 
of manufactured goods, varying in character according to the 
development of the different countries in civilization. In 
Egypt, Algeria and South Africa they include most of the 
necessaries and luxuries of civilized life, manufactured cotton 
and woollen goods, especially the former, taking the first place, 
but various food stuffs, metal goods, coal and miscellaneous 
articles being also included. In tropical Africa, and generally 
where few Europeans have settled, the great bulk of the imports 
consists as a rule of cotton goods, articles for which there is a 
constant native demand. 

No continent has in the past been so lacking in means of 



356 



AFRICA 



[COMMUNICATIONS 



communication as Africa, and it was only in the last decade 
. m of the 19th century that decided steps were taken to 
meat of remedy these defects. The African rivers, with the 
means of exception of the middle Congo and its affluents, and 
communi- tne middle course of the three other chief rivers, are 
" on ' generally unfavourable to navigation, and throughout 
the tropical region almost the sole routes have been native foot- 
paths, admitting the passage of a single file of porters, on whose 
heads all goods have been carried from place to place. Certain 
of these native trade routes are, however, much frequented, 
and lead for hundreds of miles from the coast to the interior. 
In the desert regions of the north transport is by caravans of 
camels, and in the south ox-wagons, before the advent of 
railways, supplied the general means of locomotion. The native 
trade routes led generally from the centres of greatest population 
or production to the seaports by the nearest route, but to this 
rule"there was a striking exception. The dense forests of Upper 
Guinea and the upper Congo proved a barrier which kept the 
peoples of the Sudan from direct access to the sea, and from 
Timbuktu to Darfur the great trade routes were either west to 
east or south to north across the Sahara. The principal caravan 
routes across the desert lead from different points in Morocco 
and Algeria to Timbuktu; from Tripoli to Timbuktu, Kano 
and other great marts of the western and central Sudan; from 
Bengazi to Wadai; and from Assiut on the Nile through the 
Great Oasis and the Libyan desert to Darfur. South of the 
equator the principal long-established routes are those from 
Loanda to the Lunda and Baluba countries; from Benguella via 
Bihe to Urua and the upper Zambezi; from Mossamedes across 
the Kunene to the upper Zambezi; and from Bagamoyo, opposite 
Zanzibar, to Tanganyika. Many of the native routes have been 
superseded by the improved communications introduced by 
Europeans in the utilization of waterways and the construction 
of roads and railways. Steamers have been conveyed overland 
in sections and launched on the interior waterways above the 
obstructions to navigation. On the upper Nile and Albert 
Nyanza their introduction was due to Sir S. Baker and General 
C. G. Gordon (1871-1876) ; on the middle Congo and its affluents 
to Sir H. M. Stanley and the officials of the Congo Free State, 
as well as to the Baptist missionaries on the river; and oh Lake 
Nyasa to the supporters of the Scottish mission. A small vessel 
was launched on Victoria Nyanza in 1896 by a British mercantile 
firm, and a British government steamer made its first trip in 
November 1900. On the other great lakes and on most of the 
navigable rivers steamers were plying regularly before the close 
of the 19th century. However, the shallowness of the water in 
the Niger and Zambezi renders their navigation possible only 
to light-draught steamers. Roads suitable for wheeled traffic 
are few. The first attempt at road-making in Central Africa 
on a large scale was that of Sir T. Fowell Buxton and Mr (after- 
wards Sir W.) Mackinnon, who completed the first section of a 
track leading into the interior from Dar-es-Salaam (1879). A 
still more important undertaking was the " Stevenson road," 
begun in 1881 from the head of Lake Nyasa to the south end of 
Tanganyika, and constructed mainly at the expense of Mr James 
Stevenson, a director of the African Lakes Company — a company 
which helped materially in the opening up of Nyasaland. The 
Stevenson road forms a link in the "Lakes route" into the 
heart of the continent. In British East Africa a road connecting 
Mombasa with Victoria Nyanza was completed in 1897, but has 
since been in great measure superseded by the railway. Good 
roads have also been made in German East Africa and Cameroon 
and in Madagascar. 

Railways, the chief means of affording easy access to the 
interior of the continent, were for many years after their first 
introduction to Africa almost entirely confined to the extreme 
north and south (Egypt, Algeria, Cape Colony and Natal). 
Apart from short fines in Senegal, Angola and at Lourenco 
Marques, the rest of the continent was in 1890 without a railway 
system. In Egypt the Alexandria and Cairo railway dates from 
1855, while in 1877 the lines open reached about 1100 miles, 
and in 1890, in addition to the lines traversing the delta, the 



Nile had been ascended to Assiut. In Algeria the construction 
of an inter-provincial railway was decreed in 1857, but was still 
incomplete twenty years later, when the total length of the lines 
open hardly exceeded 300 miles. Before 1890 an extension to 
Tunis had been opened, while the plateau had been crossed by 
the lines to Ain Sefra in the west and Biskra in the east. In 
Senegal the railway from Dakar to St Louis had been commenced 
and completed during the 'eighties, while the first section of the 
Senegal-Niger railway, that from Kayes to Bafulabe, was also 
constructed during the same decade. In Cape Colony, where 
in about 1880 the railways were limited to the neighbourhood 
of Cape Town, Port Elizabeth and East London, the next 
decade saw the completion of the trunk-line from Cape Town to 
Kimberley, with a junction at De Aar with that from Port 
Elizabeth. The northern frontier had, however, nowhere been 
crossed. In Natal, also, the main line had not advanced beyond 
Ladysmith. The settlement, c. 1890, of the main lines of the 
partition of the continent was followed by many projects for 
the opening up of the possessions and spheres of influence of 
the various powers by the building of railways; several of these 
schemes being carried through in a comparatively short time. 
The building of railways was undertaken by the governments 
concerned, nearly all the African lines being state-owned. In 
the Congo Free State a railway, which took some ten years to 
build, connecting the navigable waters of the lower and middle 
Congo, was completed in 1898, while in 1906 the middle and upper 
courses of the river were linked by the opening of a line past 
Stanley Falls. Thus the vast basin of the Congo was rendered 
easily accessible to commercial enterprise. In North Africa 
the Algerian and Tunisian railways were largely extended, and 
proposals were made for a great trunk-line from Tangier to 
Alexandria. The railway from Ain Sefra was continued south- 
ward towards Tuat, the project of a trans-Saharan line having 
occupied the attention of French engineers since 1 880. In French 
West Africa railway communication between the upper Senegal 
and the upper Niger was completed in 1904; from the Guinea 
coast at Konakry another line runs north-east to the upper 
Niger, while from Dahomey a third line goes to the Niger at Garu. 
In the British colonies on the same coast the building of railways 
was begun in 1896. A line to Kumasi was completed in 1903, 
and the line from Lagos to the lower Niger had reached Illorin in 
1908. Thence the railway was continued to the Niger at Jebba. 
From Baro, a port on the lower Niger which can be reached by 
steamers all the year round, another railway, begun in 1907, goes 
via Bida, Zungeru and Zaria to Kano, a total distance of 400 
miles. A line from Jebba to Zungeru affords connexion with 
the Lagos railway. 

But the greatest development of the railway systems was in 
the south and east of the continent. In British East Africa a 
survey for a railway from Mombasa to Victoria Nyanza was 
made in 1892. The first rails were laid in 1896 and the line 
reached the lake in December 1901. Meanwhile, there had been 
a great extension of railways in South Africa. Lines from Cape 
Town, Port Elizabeth, East London, Durban and Delagoa Bay 
all converged on the newly risen city of Johannesburg, the centre 
of the Rand gold mines. A more ambitious project was that 
identified with the name of Cecil Rhodes, namely, the extension 
northward of the railway from Kimberley with the object of 
effecting a continuous railway connexion from Cape Town to 
Cairo. The line from Kimberley reached Bulawayo in 1897. 
(Bulawayo is also reached from Beira on the east coast by 
another line, completed in 1902, which goes through Portuguese 
territory and Mashonaland.) The extension of the line north- 
ward from Bulawayo was begun in 1899, the Zambezi being 
bridged, immediately below the Victoria Falls, in 1905. From 
this point the railway goes north to the Katanga district of the 
Congo State. In the north of the continent a step towards the 
completion of the Cape to Cairo route was taken in the opening 
in 1899 of the railway from Wadi Haifa to Khartum. A fine 
of greater economic importance than the last named is the 
railway (completed in 1905) from Port Sudan on the Red Sea 
to the Nile a little south of Berber, thus placing the Anglo- 



BIBLIOGRAPHY] 



AFRICA 



357 



Egyptian Sudan within easy reach of the markets of the world. 
A west to east connexion across the continent by rail and steamer, 
from the molith of the Congo to Port Sudan, was arranged in 
1006 when an agreement was entered into by the Congo and 
Sudan governments for the building of a railway from Lado, on 
the Nile, to the Congo frontier, there to meet a railway starting 
from the river Congo near Stanley Falls. A railway of consider- 
able importance is that from Jibuti in the Gulf of Aden to Harrar, 
giving access to the markets of southern Abyssinia. 

Besides the railways mentioned there are several others of 
less importance. Lines run from Loanda and other ports of 
Angola towards the Congo State frontier, and from Tanga and 
Dar-es-Salaam on the coast of German East Africa towards the 
great lakes. In British Central Africa a railway connects Lake 
Nyasa with the navigable waters of the Shire, and various lines 
have been built by the French in Madagascar. 

All the main railways in South Africa, the lines in British 
West Africa, in the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan and in Egypt south 
of Luxor are of 3 ft. 6 in. gauge. The main lines in Lower Egypt 
and in Algeria and Tunisia are of 4 ft. 8% in. gauge. Elsewhere 
as in French West and British East Africa the lines are of metre 
(3-28 ft.) gauge. 

The telegraphic system of Africa is on the whole older than 
that of the railways, the newer European possessions having in 
most cases been provided with telegraph lines before railway 
projects had been set on foot. In Algeria, Egypt and Cape 
Colony the systems date back to the middle of the 19th century, 
before the end of which the lines had in each country reached 
some thousands of miles. In tropical Africa the systems of 
French West Africa, where the line from Dakar to St Louis was 
begun in 1862, were the first to be fully developed, lines having 
been carried from different points on the coast of Senegal and 
Guinea towards the Niger, the main line being prolonged north- 
west to Timbuktu, and west and south to the coast of Dahomey. 
The route for a telegraph line to connect Timbuktu with Algeria 
was surveyed in 1905. The Congo region is furnished with 
several telegraphic systems, the longest going from the mouth 
of the river to Lake Tanganyika. From Ujiji on the east coast 
of that lake there is telegraphic communication via Tabora with 
Dar-es-Salaam and via Nyasa and Rhodesia with Cape Town. 
The last-named line is the longest link in the trans-continental 
line first suggested in 1876 by Sir (then Mr) Edwin Arnold and 
afterwards taken up by Cecil Rhodes. The northern link from 
Egypt to Khartum has been continued southward to Uganda, 
while another line connects Uganda with Mombasa. At the 
principal seaports the inland systems are connected with sub- 
marine cables which place Africa in telegraphic communication 
with the rest of the world. 

Numerous steamship lines run from Great Britain, Germany, 
France and other countries to the African seaports, the journey 
from any place in western Europe to any port on the African 
coast occupying, by the shortest route, not more than three 
weeks. (E. He., F. R. C.) 

Bibliography. — Authoritative works dealing with Africa as a 
whole in any of its aspects are comparatively rare. Besides such 
volumes the following list includes therefore books containing 
valuable information concerning large or typical sections of the 
continent : — 

§ I. General Descriptions. — (a) Ancient and Medieval. Herodo- 
tus, ed. G. Rawlinson, 4 vols. 1 (1880); Ptolemy's Geographic, ed. 
C. Miiller, vol. i. (Paris, 1883-1901); Ibn Haukal, " Description de 
1 Afnque " (transl. McG. de Slane), Nouv. Journal asiatique, 1842; 
Edrisi, " Geographie " (transl. Jaubert), Rec. de voyages . . . Soc. de 
Geogr. vol. v. (Paris, 1836); Abulfeda, Geographie (transl. Reinaud 
and Guyard, Paris, 1848-1883) ; M. A. P. d'Avezac, Description de 
lAfrique ancienne (Paris, 1845); L. de Marmol, Description general 
de Africa (Granada, 1573) ; L. Sanuto, Geografia dell' Africa (Venice, 
1588); F. Pigafetta, A Report of the Kingdom of Congo, &c. (1597); 
Leo Africanus, The History and Description of Africa (transl. J. Pory, 
ed. R. Brown), 3 vols. (1896); O. Dapper, Naukeurige beschrijvinge 
der afrikaensche gewesten, &c. (Amsterdam, 1668) (also English 
version by Ogilvy, 1670, and French version, Amsterdam, 1686); 
B. Tellez, " Travels of the Jesuits in Ethiopia," A New Collection 
of Voyages, vol. vii. (17 10) ; G. A. Cav azzi da Montecuccolo, Istorica 

1 Where no place of publication is given, London is to be under- 
stood. 



Descrittione de tre Regni Congo, Matamba, et Angola (Milan, 1690) 
(account of the labours of the Capuchin missionaries and their 
observations on the country and people) ; J. Barbot, " Description 
of the Coasts of North and South Guinea and of Ethiopia Inferior," 
Churchill's Voyages, vol. v. (1707); W. Bosman, A New . . . 
Description of the Coasts of Guinea, &c, 2nd ed. (1721); J. B. Labat, 
Nouvelle relation del'Afrique occidentals, 5 vols. (Paris, 1728); Idem,' 
Relation historique de l'£thiopie occidentale, 5 vols. (Paris, 1732). 
(b) Modern. B. d'Anville, Memoire cone, les rivieres de I'interieur 
de I'Afrique (Paris, n.d.) ; M. Vollkommer, Die Quellen B. d'Anville' s 
fur seine kritische Karte von Afrika (Munich, 1904) ; C. Ritter, Die 
Erdkunde, i. Theil, 1. Buch, " Afrika " (Berlin, 1822); J. M'Qiieen, 
Geographical and Commercial View of Northern and Central Africa 
(Edinburgh, 1821) ; Idem, Geographical Survey of Africa (1840) ; W- D. 
Cooley, Inner Africa laid open (1852); E. Reclus, Nouvelle geo- 
graphie universale, vols, x.-xiii. (1885-1888); A. H. Keane, Africa 
(in Stanford's Compendium), 2 vols., 2nd ed. (1904-1907) ; F. Hahn 
and I W. Sievers, Afrika, 2. Aufl. (Leipzig, 1901); M. Fallex and 
A. Mairey, L'Afrique au debut du XX' siecle (Paris, 1906) ; Sir C. P. 
Lucas, Historical Geography of the British Colonies, volsJ iii. and iv. 
(Oxford, 1894, 1904); F. D. and A. J. Herbertson, Descriptive 
Geographies from Original Sources: Africa (1902) ; British Africa {The 
British Empire Series, vol. ii., 1899); Journal of the African Society; 
Comite de I'Afrique francaise, Bulletin, Paris; Mitteilungentfder 
afrikan. Gesellschaft in Deutschland (Berlin, 1 879-1 889); Mittei- 
lungen . . . aus den deutschen Schutzegebieten (Berlin) ; H. Schirmer, 
Le Sahara (Paris, 1893) ; Mary H. Kingsley, West African Studies, 
2nd ed. (1901); J. Bryce, Impressions of South Africa (1897); 
Sir Harry Johnston, The Uganda Protectorate, 2 vols. (1902) (vol. ii. is 
devoted to anthropology) ; E. D. Morel, Affairs of West Africa (1902). 
§ II. Geography {Physical), Geology, Climate, Flora and Fauna. — 
(For Descriptive Geogr. see § I.)— G. Giirich, " Uberblick iiber den 
geolog. Bau des afr. Kontinents," Peterm. Mitt., 1887; A. Knox, 
Notes on the Geology of the Continent of Africa (1906) (includes a 
bibliography) ; L. von Hohnel, A. Rosiwal, F. Toula and E. Suess, 
Beitrage zur geologischen Kenntniss des ostlichen Afrika (Vienna, 1891) ; 
E. Stromer, Die Geologie der deutschen Schutzgebieten in Afrika 
(Munich, 1896); J. Chavanne, Afrika im Lichte unserer Tage: 
Bodengestalt, &c. (Vienna, 1881); F. Heidrich, " Die mittlere Hohe 
Afrikas," Peterm. Mitt., 1888; J. W. Gregory, The Great Rift- 
Valley (1896); H. G. Lyons, The Physiography of the River Nile 
and its Basin (Cairo, 1906) ; S. Passarage, Die Kalahari: Versuch 
einer physischgeogr. Darstellung . . . des sildafr. Beckens (Berlin. 
1904) ; Idem, " Inselberglandschaften im tropischen Afrika," Naturw. 
Wochenschrift, 1904. 654-665; J. E. S. Moore, The Tanganyihc 
Problem (1903) ; W. H. Hudleston, " On the Origin of the Marine 
(Halolimnic) Fauna of Lake Tanganyika," Journ. of Trans. Victoria 
Inst., 1904, 300-351 (discusses the whole question of the geological 
history of equatorial Africa); E. Stromer, " 1st der Tanganyika eir, 
Relikten-See?" Peterm. Mitt., 1901, 275-278; E. Kohlschutter 
" Die . . . Arbeiten der Pendelexpedition ... in Deutsch-Ost- Afrika,' 
Verh. Deuts. Geographentages Breslau, 1901, 133-153; J. Cornet 
"La geologie du bassin du Congo," Bull. Soc. Beige geol., 1898 
E. G. Ravenstein, "The Climatology of Africa " (ten reports)! 
Reports Brit. Association, 1892-1901; Idem, " Climatologica 
Observations ... I. Tropical Africa " (1904) ; H. G. Lyons, " Oi: 
the Relations between Variations of Atmospheric Pressure . . . anc 1 
the Nile Flood," Proc. Roy. Soc, Ser. A, vol. lxxvi., 1905; P. 
Reichard, " Zur Frage der Austrocknung Afrikas," Geogr. Zeitschrift, 
1895; J. Hoffmann, "Die tiefsten Temperaturen auf den Hoch- 
landern," &c, Peterm. Mitt., 1905; G. Fraunberger, " Studien iiber 
die jahrlichen Niederschlagsmengen des afrik. Kontinents," Peterm. 
Mitt., 1906; D. Oliver and Sir W. T. Thiselton-Dyer, Flora 0] 
Tropical Africa, 10 vols. (1888-1906); K. Oschatz, Anordnung 
der Vegetation in Afrika (Erlangen, 1900) ; A. Engler, Hochgebirgs- 
flora des tropischen Afrika (Berlin, 1892); Idem, Die Pfllanzenwelt 
Ostafrikas und der Nachbargebiete, 3 vols. (Berlin, 1895) ; Idem, 
Beitrage zur Flora von Afrika (Engler's Botan. Jahrbucher, 14 
vols. &c.) ; W. P. Hiern, Catalogue of the African Plants collected by Dr 
Friedrich Welwitschin 1853-1861, 2 vols. (1896-1901) ; R. Schlechter, 
Westafrikanische Kautschuk- Expedition (Berlin, 1900) ; H. Baum' 
Kunene-Sambesi-Expedition (Berlin, 1903) (largely concerned with 
botany) ; W. L. Sclater, " Geography of Mammals, No. iv. The 
Ethiopian Region," Geog. Journal, March 1896; H. A. Bryden 
and others, Great and Small Game of Africa (1899); F. C. Selous, 
African Nature Notes and Reminiscences (1908) ; E. N. Buxton, Two 
African Trips: with Notes and Suggestions on Big-Game Preservation 
in Africa (1902) (contains photographs of living animals); G. 
Schillings, With Flash-light and Rifle in Equatorial East Africa (1906) : 
Idem, In Wildest Africa (1907) (striking collection of photographs of 
living wild animals); Exploration scientifique de I'Algerie: Histoire 
naturelle, 14 vols, and 4 atlases, Paris (1 846-1 850); Annates du 
Musee du Congo: Botanique, Zoologie (Brussels, 1898, &c). The 
latest results of geographical research and a bibliography of current 
literature are given in the Geographical Journal, published monthly 
by the Royal Geographical Society. 

§ III. Ethnology. — H. Hartmann, Die Volker Afrikas (Leipzig, 
1879); B. Ankermann, ". Kulturkreise in Afrika, Zeit. f. Eth., 
vol. xxxvii. p. 54 ; Idem, " Uber den gegenwartigen Stand der Ethno- 
graphie der Sudhalfte Afrikas," Arch.f. Anth. n.f. iv. p. 24;G.Ser. i. 



358 



AFRICA, ROMAN 



Antropologw. delta stirpe camitica (Turin, 1897); J- Deniker, " Dis- 
tribution geogr. et caracteres physiques des Pygmees africains," La 
Geographic Paris, vol. viii. pp. 213-220; G. W. Stow and G. M. 
Theal, The Native Races of South Africa (1905) ; K. Barthel, Vblker- 
bewegungen auf der Sudhalfte des afrik. Kontinents (Leipzig, 1893); 
A. B. Ellis, The Tshi-speaking Peoples of the Gold Coast (1887) ; Idem, 
The Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast (1890); Idem, The 
Yoruba-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast (1894); H. Ling Roth, 
Great Benin, Us Customs, &c. (Halifax, 1903); H. Frobenius, Die 
Ileiden-Neger des agyptischen .Sudan (Berlin, 1893) ; Herbert Spencer 
and D. Duncan, Descriptive Sociology, vol. iv. African Races (1875); 
A. de Preville, Les Societes africaines (Paris, 1894); D. Macdonald, 
Africana; or, the Heart of Heathen Africa, 2 vols. (1882); L. Fro- 
benius, Der Ursprung der afrikanischen Kulturen (Der Ursprung der 
Kuitur, Band i.) (Berlin, 1898) ; Idem, " Die Masken und Geheim- 
bunde Afrikas," Abhandl. Kaiserl. Leopoldin.-Carolin. Deuts. Akad. 
Naturforscher, 1899, 1-278; G. Schweinfurth, Aries africanae: 
Illustrations and Descriptions of . . . industrial Arts, &c. (in German 
and English) (Leipzig, 1875) ; F. Ratzel, Die afrikanischen Bbgen 
. . . eine anthrop.-geographische Studie (Leipzig, 1891); K. Weule, 
Der afrikanische Pfeil (Leipzig, 1899); H. Frobenius, Afrikanische 
Bautypen (Dauchau bei Munchen, 1894); H. Schurtz, Die afrikan. 
Gewerbe (Leipzig, 1900) ; E. W. Blyden, Christianity, Islam and the 
Negro Race (1887); James Stewart, Dawn in the Dark Continent, 
or Africa and its Missions (Edinburgh and London, 1903); W. H. J. 
Bleek, Comparative Grammar of South African Languages, 2 parts 
(1862-1869) ; Idem, Vocabularies of the Districts of Lourenzo Marques, 
fife, cfc. (1900) ; R. N. Cust, Sketch of the Modern Languages of Africa, 
2 vols. (1883) ; F. W. Kolbe, A Language Study based on Bantu 
(1888) ; J. T. Last, Polyglotta Africana orientalis (1885) ; J. Torrend, 
Comparative Granimar of the South African Bantu Languages (1891) ; 
S. \V. Koelle, Polyglotta Africana (1854); C. Velten, Schilderungen 
der Suaheli von Expeditionen v. Wissmanns, &c, &c. (1901) (narra- 
tives taken down from the mouths of natives); A. Vierkandt, 
lotksgedichte im westlichen Central- Afrika (Leipzig, 1895). For latest 
information the following periodicals should be consulted: — 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and 
Ireland; Man (same publishers) ; Zeitschrift f. Ethnologie; Archiv 
f. Anthropologie; L'Anthropologie. 

§ IV. Archaeology and Art. — Publications of the Egyptian Ex- 
ploration Fund; A. Mariette-Bey, The Monuments of Upper Egypt 
(1890); H. Brugsch, Die Agyptologie (Leipzig, 1891); G. Maspero, 
V Archeologie egyptienne (Paris, 1890?); R. Lepsius, Denkmaler aus 
Agypten und Athiopien . . ., 6 vols. (Berlin, 1849-1859); G. A. 
Hoskins, Travels in Ethiopia . . . illustrating the Antiquities of the 
Ancient Kingdom of Meroe (1835); Records of the Past: being 
English Translations of . . . Egyptian Monuments, vols. 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 
12(1873-1881); Ditto, new series, 6 vols. (1890-1892); D. Randall- 
Maclver and A. Wilkin, Libyan Notes (1901) (archaeology and 
ethnology of North Africa); G. Boissier, L'Afrique romaine: Pro- 
menades archeologiques en Algerie et en Tunisie, 2nd ed. (Paris, 1 901) ; 
D. Randall-Maclver, Mediaeval Rhodesia (1906) ; Prisse d'Avennes, 
Histoire de I'art egyptien d'apres les monuments, &c. with atlas (Paris, 
1879); G. Perrot and C. Chipiez, History of Art in Ancient Egypt, 
2 vols. (1883); H. Wallis, Egyptian Ceramic Art (1900); C. H. Read 
and O. M. Dalton, Antiquities from the City of Benin and from other 
parts of West Africa (1899). 

§ V. Travel and Exploration. — Dean W. Vincent, The Commerce 
and Navigation of the Ancients, vol. 2, The Periplus of the Erythraean 
Sea (1807) ; G. E. de Azurara, Chronicle of the Discovery and Conquest 
of Guinea (Eng. trans., 2 vols., 1896, 1899); R - H. Major, Life of 
Prince Henry the Navigator (1868) ; E. G. Ravenstein, " The Voyages 
of Diogo Cao and Barth. Diaz," Geogr. Journ., Dec. 1900; O. Hartig, 
" Altere Entdeckungsgeschichte und Kartographie Afrikas," Mitt. 
Geogr. Gesells. Wien, 1905; J. Leyden and H. Murray, Historical 
Account of Discoveries, &c, 2 vols., 2nd ed. (1818); T. E. Bowditch, 
Account of the Discoveries of the Portuguese in the Interior of Angola 
and Mozambique (1824); P. Paulitschke, Die geogr. Forschung des 
afrikan. Continents (Vienna, 1880); A. Supan, " Ein Jahrhundert 
der Afrika-Forschung," Peterm. Mitt., 1888; R. Brown, The Story of 
Africa and its Explorers, 4 vols. (1892-1895); Sir Harry Johnston, 
The Nile Quest (1903) ; James Bruce, Travels to discover the Source of 
the Nile in 1768-1773, 5 vols., Edinburgh (1790); Proceedings of the 
Association for . . . Discovery of the Interior Parts of Africa, 1790- 
1810; Mungo Park, Travels into the Interior Districts of Africa 
('799) ;. Idem, Journal of a Mission, &c. (1815) ; Capt. J. K. Tuckey, 
Narrative of an Expedition to explore the River Zaire or Congo in 
1816 (1818); D. Denham and H. Clapperton, Narrative of Travels 
and Discoveries in N. and Cent. Africa (1826) ; R. Caillie, Journal d'un 
voyage d Temboctu et d, Jenne, 3 vols., Paris (1830); D. Livingstone, 
Missionary Travels . . . in South Africa (1857); The Last Journals 
of David. Livingstone in Central Africa, ed. H. Waller (1874); H. 
Barth, Travels and Discoveries in North and Central Africa, 5 vols. 
(1857); J- L. Krapf, Travels, Researches, &c, in Eastern Africa 
(i860) ; Sir R. F. Burton, The Lake Regions of Central Africa, 2 vols. 
(i860); J. H. Speke, Journal of the Discovery of the Source of the Nile 
(1863); Sir S. W. Baker, The Albert Nyanza, 2 vols. (1866); G. 
Schweinfurth, The Heart of Africa, 2 vols. (1873); V. L. Cameron, 
Across Africa, 2 vols. (1877); T. Baines, The Gold Regions of South- 
Eastern Africa (1877) ; Sir H. M. Stanley, Through the Dark Continent, 



2 vols. (1878) ; Idem, In Darkest Africa, 2, vols. (1890) ; G. Nachtjgal, 
Sahara und Sudan, 3 vols. (Berlin, 1 879-1 889); P. S. de Brazza, Les 
Voyages de . . . (1875-1882), Paris, 1884; J- Thomson, Through 
Masai Land (1885); H. von Wissmann, Unter Deutscher Flagge 
quer durch Afrika, &c. (Berlin, 1889); Idem, My Second Journey 
through Equatorial Africa (1891); W. Junker, Travels in Africa 
1875-1886, 3 vols. (1890-1892); L. G, Binger, Du Niger an. Golfe 
de Guinee, &c. (Paris, 1892); O. Baumann, Durch Masaiiand zur 
Nilquelle (Berlin, 1894) ; R. Kandt, Caput Nili (Berlin, 1904) ; C. A. 
von Gotzen, Durch Afrika von Ost nach West (Berlin, 1896) ; L. Vanu- 
telli and C. Citerni, Seconda spedizione Bdttego: LOmo (Milan, 1899) ; 

F. Foureau, D 'Alger au Congo parte Tchad (Paris, 1902); C. Lemaire,' 
Mission scientifique du Ka-Tanga: Journal de route, I vol., Resultals 
des observations, 16 parts (Brussels, 1902); A. St. H. Gibbons, Africa 
from South to North through Marotseland, 2 vols. (1904) ; E. Lenfant, 
La Grande Route du Tchad (Paris, 1905) ; Boyd Alexander, From the 
Niger to the Nile, 2 vols.. (1907). 

§ VI. Historical and Political. — H. Schurtz, Africa(World's History, 
vol. 3, part 3) (1903) ; Sir H. H. Johnston, History of the Colonization 
of Africa by Alien Races (Cambridge, 1899) (reprint with additional 
chapter "Latest Developments," 1905); A. H. L. Heeren, Reflec- 
tions on the Politics, Intercourse and Trade of the Ancient Nations 
of Africa, 2 vols. (Oxford, 1832); G. Rawlinson, History of Ancient 
Egypt (1881) ; A. Graham, Roman Africa (1902) ; J. de Barros, Asia: 
Ira Decada, Lisbon (1552 and 1777-1778); J. Strandes, Die Pdrtu- 
giesenzeitvon . . . Ostafrika (Berlin, 1899) ; R. Schiick, Brandenburg- 
Preussens Kolonial-Politik . . . 1641-1721, 2 vols. (Leipzig, 1889); 

G. M'Call Theal, History and Ethnography of Africa south of the 
Zambesi . . . to 1705, 3 vols. (1908- ), and History of South Africa 
since September 179$ (to 1872) 5 vols. (1908); Idem, Records of 
South-Eastern Africa, 9 vols., 1898-1903; Lady Lugard, A Tropical 
Dependency: Outline of the History of the Western Sudan, &c. (1905) • 
? ir c. E TV^ e . rts fef' T Jt e Ma P °f A f rica b y Treaty, 3 vols. (3rd ed., 1909) ; 
J. b. Keltie, The Partition of Africa, 2nd ed. (1895) ; F. Van Ortroy, 
Conventions international ' definissant les limites . . . en Afrique 
(Brussels, 1898); General Act of the Conference of Berlin, 1885; 
The Surveys and Explorations of British Africa (Colonial Reports, 
No. 500) (1906), and annual reports thereafter; Sir F. D. Lugard! 
The Rise of our East African Empire, 2 vols. (1893); E. Petit, -Les 
colonies francaises, 2 vols. (Paris, 1902-1904); E. Rouard de Card. 
Les Traites de protector at conclus par la France en Afrique, 1870-189=; 
(Paris, 1897); A. J. de Araujo, Colonies portuguaises a" Afrique 
(Lisbon, 1900) ; B.Trognitz, " Ne'ue Arealbestimmung des Continents 
Afrika," Petermanns Mitt., 1893', 220-221; A. Supan, "Die Be- 
velkerung der Erde," xii., Peterm. Milt. Erganzungsh. 146 (Gotha, 
1904) (deals with areas as well as population). 

§ VII. Commerce and Economics.— -A. Silva White, The Develop- 
ment of Africa, 2nd ed. (1892); K. Dove, " Grundziige einer Wirt- 
schaftsgeographie Afrikas, Geographische Zeitschrift, 1905, 1-18; 
E. Hahn, ' Die Stellung Afrikas in der Geschichte des Welthandels," 
Verhandl. 11. Deutsch. Geographentags zu Bremen (Berlin, 1896); 
L. de Launay, Les Richesses minerales de I Afrique (Paris, 1903) ; 
K. Futterer, Afrika in seiner Bedeutung fur die Goldproduktion 
(Berlin, 1894); P. Reichard, "Das afrikan. Elfenbein und sein 
Handel," Deutsche geogr. Blatter (Bremen, 1889); Sir A. Moloney, 
Sketch of the Forestry of West Africa (1887); Dewevre, "Les 
Caoutchoucs africains," Ann. Soc. Set. Bruxelles, 1895; Sir T. F. 
Buxton, The African Slave Trade and its Remedy (1840); C. M. A. 
Lavigerie, L'Esclavage africain (Paris, 1888); E. de Renty, Les 
Chemins de fer coloniaux en Afrique, 3 vols. (Paris', 1 903-1 905); 
H. Meyer, Die Eisenbahnen im tropischen Afrika (Leipzig, 1902); 
G. Grenfell, " The Upper Congo as a Waterway," Geogr. Journ., 
Nov. 1902; A. St. H. Gibbons, " The Nile and Zambezi Systems as 
Waterways," Journ. R. Colon. Inst., 1901 ; K. Lent, " Verkehrs- 
mittel in Ostafrika," Deutsches Kolonialblatt, 1 894; " Trade of 
the United Kingdom with the African Continent in 1 898-1902," 
Board of T. Journ., 1903; Diplomatic and Consular Reports, Annual 
Series; Colonial Reports; T. H. Parke, Guide to Health in Africa 
(1893); R. W. Felkin, Geographical Distribution of Tropical Diseases 
in Africa (1895). 

The following bibliographies may also be consulted: J. Gay, 
Bibliographic des ouvrages relatifs a I' Afrique, &c. (San Remo, 1875); 
P. Paulitschke, Die Afrika-Literatur von 1500 bis 1750 (Vienne, 
1882); Catalogue of the Colonial . Office Library, vol. 3, Africa 
(specially for government publications). (E. He.) 

AFRICA, ROMAN. The Romans gave the name of Africa to 
that part of the world which the Greeks called Libya (Ai^uij). 
It comprised the whole of the portion of the African continent 
known to the ancients, except Egypt and Ethiopia. But besides 
this general sense, which occurs in Pliny (iii. 3), Pomponius 
Mela (i. 8) and other authors, the official and administrative 
language used the word Africa in .a narrower sense, which is 
noticed below. The term was certainly borrowed by the Romans 
from the language of the natives'. In Latin literature it was 
employed for the first time by the poet Ennius, who wrote in the 
interval between the First and Second Punic Wars {Ann. vi.; 
Sat. iii.). By him the term was confined to the territory of 



AFRICA, ROMAN 



359 



Carthage and the regions composing the eastern group of the 
Atlas. Among the numerous conjectures which have been made 
as to the etymology of the term Africa (' A<f>piKr]) may be quoted 
that which derives it from the Semitic radical "hb (" separate "), 
Africa being considered, in this connexion, as a Phoenician 
settlement " separated " from the mother country, Asiatic 
Phoenicia. It has also been held that the word Africa comes 
from friqi, farikia (the country of fruit). The best hypothesis 
in the writer's opinion is that maintained by Charles Tissot, 
who sees in the word " Africa " the name of the great Berber tribe, 
the Aourigha (whose name would have been pronounced Afarika), 
the modern Aouraghen, now driven back into the Sahara, but 
in ancient times the principal indigenous element of the African 
empire of Carthage (Tissot, Geogr. comp. i. 389). Thus Africa 
was originally, in the eyes of the Romans and Carthaginians alike, 
the country inhabited by the great tribe of Berbers or Numidians 
called Afarik. Cyrenaica, on the east, attached to Egypt, was 
then excluded from it, and, similarly, Mauretania, on the west. 

At the time of the Third Punic War the Africa of the Cartha- 
ginians was but a fragment of their ancient native empire. It 
comprised the territory bounded by a vague line running from 
the mouth of the Tusca (Wad el Kebir), opposite the island of 
Tabraca (Tabarca), as far as the town of Thenae (Tina), at the 
mouth of the Gulf of Gabes. The rest of Africa had passed into 
the hands of the kings of Numidia, who were allies of the Romans. 

After the capture of Carthage by Scipio (146 B.C.) this territory 
was erected into a Roman province, and a trench, the fossa, regia, 
was dug to mark the boundary of the Roman province of Africa 
and the dominions of the Numidian princes. There have been 
discovered (1907) the remains of this ditch protected by a low 
wall or a stone dyke; some of the boundary stones which marked 
its course, and inscriptions mentioning it, have also been found. 
From Testur on the Mejerda the fossa regia can be followed by 
these indications for several miles along the Jebel esh-Sheid. 
The ditch ran northward to Tabarca and southward to Tina. 
The importance of the discoveries lies in the fact that the ditch 
which in later times divided the provinces of Africa vetus and 
Africa nova was at the time of the Third Punic War the boun- 
dary of Carthaginian territory (R. Cagnat, " Le fosse des fron- 
tieres romaines " in Melanges Boissier, 1905, p. 227; L. Poinssot 
in Comptes rendus de I' Acad, des Inscript. et Belles Lettres, 1907, 
p. 466; Classical Review, 1907, December, p. 255). The govern- 
ment of the Roman province thus delimited was entrusted to 
a praetor or propraetor, of whom several are now known, 
e.g. P. Sextilius, propraetor Africae, according to coins of 
Hadrumetum of the year 94 B.C. The towns which had fought 
on the side of the Romans during the Third Punic War were 
declared civitates liberae, and became exceedingly prosperous. 
They were Utica (Bu Shatir), Hadrumetum (Susa), Thapsus 
(Dimas), Leptis Minor (Lemta), Achulla (Badria), Uzalis (about 
n m. from Utica) and Theudalis. Those towns, however, 
which had remained faithful to Carthage were destroyed, like 
Carthage itself. 

After the Jugurthine war in 106, the whole of the regio Tripoli- 
tana, comprising Leptis Magna (Lebda), Oea (Tripoli), Sabrata, 
and the other towns on the littoral of the two Syrtes, appears to 
have been annexed to the Roman province in a more or less 
regular manner (Tissot ii. 21). The battle of Thapsus in 46 
made the Romans definitely masters of Numidia, and the spheres 
of administration were clearly marked out. Numidia was con- 
verted into a new province called " Africa Nova," and of this 
province the historian Sallust was appointed proconsul and hv 
vested with the imperium. From that time the old province of 
Africa was known as " Africa Vetus " or " Africa Propria." 

This state of affairs, however, lasted but a short time. In 
31 B.C. Octavius gave up Numidia, or Africa Nova, to King 
Juba II. Five years later Augustus gave Mauretania and some 
Gaetulian districts to Juba, and received in exchange Numidia, 
which thus reverted to direct Roman control. Numidia, how- 
ever, no longer formed a distinct government, but was attached 
to the old province of Africa. From 25 B.C. the Roman province 
of Africa comprised the whole of the region between the mouth 



of the Ampsaga (Wad Rummel, Wad el Kebir) on the west, and 
the two tumuli called the altars of the Philaeni, the immutable 
boundary between Tripolitana and Cyrenaica, on the east 
(Tissot ii. 261). In the partition of the government of the 
provinces of the Roman empire between the senate and the 
emperor, Africa fell to the senate, and was henceforth ad- 
ministered by a proconsul. Subordinate to him were the legati 
pro consule, who were placed at the head of districts called 
dioceses. At first there were only three dioceses: Cartha- 
giniensis, Hipponiensis (headquarters Hippo Diarrhytus, now 
Bizerta), and Numidica (headquarters Cirta, now Constantine). 
At a later date the diocesis Hadrumetina was formed, and perhaps 
at some date unknown the diocesis Tripolitana. 

The province of Africa was the only senatorial province whose 
governor had originally been invested with military powers. 
The proconsul of Africa, in fact, had command of the legio III. 
Augusta and the auxiliary corps. But in a.d. 37 Caligula de- 
prived the proconsul of his military powers and gave them to the 
imperial legate (legatus Augusti pro praetore provinciae Africae), 
who was nominated directly by the emperor, and whose special 
duty it was to guard the frontier zone (Tacitus, Hist. iv. 48; 
Dio Cass. lix. 20). The headquarters of the imperial legate were 
originally at Cirta and afterwards at Lambaesa (Lambessa). 
The military posts were drawn up in echelon along the frontier 
of the desert, especially along the southern slopes of the Aures, 
as far as Ad Majores (Besseriani), and on the Tripoli tan frontier 
as far as Cydamus (Ghadames), forming an immense arc extend- 
ing from Cyrenaica to Mauretania. A network of military routes, 
constructed and kept in repair by the soldiers, led from Lambaesa 
in all directions, and stretched along the frontier as far as Leptis 
Magna, passing Theveste (Tebessa), Thenae and Tacape (Gabes). 
The powers of the proconsul, however, extended scarcely beyond 
the ancient Africa Vetus and the towns on the littoral. Towards 
194 Septimius Severus completed the reform of Caligula by 
detaching from the province of Africa the greater partof Numidia 
to constitute a special province governed by a procurator, sub- 
ordinate to the imperial legate and resident at Cirta (Tissot 
ii. 34). This province was called Numidia Cirtensis, as opposed 
to Numidia Inferior or proconsular Numidia. 

In Diocletian's great reform of the administrative system of 
the empire, the whole of Roman Africa, with the exception of 
Mauretania Tingitana (which was attached to the province 
of Spain), constituted a single diocese subdivided into six 
provinces: Zeugi tana (Carthage), Byzacium (Hadrumetum, 
now Susa), Numidia Cirtensis (Cirta, Constantine), Tripolitana 
(Tripolis), Mauretania Sitifensis (Sitifis, Setif), and Mauretania 
Caesariensis (Caesarea, now Cherchel). These provinces were 
administered, according to circumstances, by a praeses of sena- 
torial rank, a legatus pro praetore, or a vir clarissimus consularis. 
Some changes were eventually necessitated by the wars with the 
Moors and the Vandals. By a treaty concluded in 476, the 
emperor Zeno recognized Genseric as master of all Africa. Re- 
conquered by Belisarius in 534, Africa formed, under the name 
of praefectura Africae, one of the great administrative districts 
of the Byzantine empire. It was subdivided into six provinces, 
which were placed under the authority of the praetorian prefect 
of Africa. These provinces were Zeugitana (the former Pro- 
consularis), Carthage, Byzacium, Tripolitana, Numidia and 
Mauretania. The civil government was carried on by consulares 
or praesides, while the military government was in the hands of 
four duces militum, who made strenuous efforts to drive out the 
barbarians. The country was studded thickly with burgi(small 
forts) and clausurae (long walls) , the ruins of which still subsist. 
In 647 the Arabs penetrated into Ifrikia, which was destined to 
fall for ever out of the grasp of the Romans. In 697 Carthage 
was taken. 

The bulk of the population of Roman Africa was invariably 
composed of three chief elements: the indigenous Berber tribes, 
the ancient Carthaginians of Phoenician origin and the Roman 
colonists. The Berber tribes, whose racial unity is attested by 
their common spoken language and by the comparatively 
numerous Berber inscriptions that have come down to us, bore 



3 6 ° 



AFRICA, ROMAN 



in ancient times the generic names of Numidians, Gaetulians 
and Moors or Maurusiani. Herodotus mentions a great number 
of these tribes. During the Roman period, according to Pliny, 
there were settlements of 26 indigenous tribes extending from the 
Ampsaga as far as Cyrenaica. The much more detailed list of 
Ptolemy enumerates 39 indigenous tribes in the province of 
Africa and 25 in Mauretania Caesariensis. Ammianus Marcel- 
linus, Procopius and Flavius Cresconius Corippus give still 
further names. Besides the Afri (Aourigha) of the territory of 
Carthage, the principal tribes that took part in the wars against 
the Romans were the Lotophagi, the Garamantes, the Maces, the 
Nasamones in the regions of the S.E., the Misulani or Musulamii 
(whence the name Mussulman) , the Massyli and the Massaesyli in 
the E., who were neighbours of the Moors. The non-nomads of 
these Libyan tribes dwelt in huts made of stakes supporting 
plaited mats of rush or asphodel. These dwellings, which were 
called mapalia, are the modern gourbis. African epigraphy has 
revealed the names of some of their deities: deus invictus Aulisva; 
the god Motmanius, associated with Mercury; the god Lilleus; 
Baldir Augustus; Kautus paler; the goddess Gilva, identified 
with Tellus, and Ifru Augustus (Tissot i. 486). The Johannis of 
Corippus mentions three native divinities: Sinifere, Mastiman 
and Gurzil. There were also local divinities in all the principal 
districts. The rock bas-reliefs and other monuments showing 
native divinities^.re rare, and give only very summary representa- 
tions. Dolmens, however, occur in great numbers in Tunisia 
and the province of Constantine. Tumuli, too, are found through- 
out northern Africa, thejmost celebrated being that near Cherchel, 
the Kubr-er-Rumia (" tomb of the Christian lady "), which was 
regarded by Pomponius Mela as the royal burying-place of the 
kings of Numidia. 

During the Roman period the ancient Carthaginians of Phoe- 
nician origin and the bastard population termed by ancient 
authors Libyo-Phoenicians, like the modern Maltese, invariably 
formed the predominant population of the towns on the littoral, 
and retained the Punic language until the 6th century of the 
Christian era. The municipal magistrates took the title of 
suffetes in place of that of duumvirs, and in certain towns the 
Christian bishops were obliged to know the lingua Punica, since 
it was the only language that the people understood. Neverthe- 
less, the Roman functionaries, the army and the colonists from 
Italy soon brought the Latin element into Africa, where it 
flourished with such vigour that, in the 3rd century, Carthage 
became the centre of a Romano-African civilization of extra- 
ordinary literary brilliancy, which numbered among its leaders 
such men as Apuleius, Tertullian, Arnobius, Cyprian, Augustine 
and many others. 

Carthage regained its rank of capital of Africa under Augustus, 
when thousands of Roman colonists flocked to the town. Utica 
became a Roman colony under Hadrian, and the civitates liberae, 
municipia, castella, pagi and tunes were peopled with Latins. 
The towns of the ancient province of Africa which received 
coloniae were very numerous: Abitensis (civitas Avittensis Bibba) , 
Bisica Lucana (Tastour), Byzacium, Capsa (Gafsa), Carthage, 
Cuina, Curubis (Kurba), Hadrumetum (Susa), Hippo Diarrhytus 
or Zarytus (Bizerta), Leptis Magna (Lebda), Maxula (Ghades, 
Rades or Gades) , Neapolis (Nabel, Nebeul) , Oea (Tripoli) , Sab rata 
(Zoara), colonia Scillitana (Ghasrin), Sufes (Sbiba), Tacape 
(Gabes) , Thaenae or Thenae (Tina) , Thelepte ( Medinet Kedima) , 
Thugga (Dugga), Thuburbo maius (Kasbat), Thysdrus (El Jem), 
Uthina (Wadna) and Vallis (Median). Of the municipia may be 
mentioned Gigthis or Gigthi (Bu Grara), Thibussicensium Bure 
(Tebursuk), Zita and the turris Tamalleni (Telmin). 

The province of Numidia was at first colonized principally by 
the military settlements of the Romans. Cirta (Constantine) and 
Bulla Regia (Hammam Darraj), its chief towns, received coloniae 
of soldiers and veterans, as well as Theveste (Tebessa) and 
Thamugas (Timgad). The fine ruins which have been discovered 
at the last-mentioned place have earned for it the surname of the 
African Pompeii (see below). 

Archaeology. — Roman Africa has been the subject of innumer- 
able historical and archaeological researches, especially since the 



conquest of Algeria and Tunisia by the French. The country is 
covered with Roman and Byzantine remains. Each of these 
ruins has been visited by archaeologists who have copied in- 
scriptions, described the temples, triumphal arches, porticos, 
mausoleums and the other monuments which are still standing, 
collected statues or other antiquities; and in many cases they 
have actually excavated. The results of all these labours have 
been published, from about 1850 onwards, annually, and, indeed, 
almost from day to day, in various scientific periodicals. Among 
the principal of these are: — Memoires de la SpciStS archiologique 
de Constantine, Bulletin de la SociUS giographique et arcMologique 
d'Oran, Revue africaine of Algiers, to which we should add the 
Revue archeologique of Paris, the Archives des missions scien- 
tifiques and the Bulletin arcMologique du Comite" des travaux 
historiques and the Milanges of the French School at Rome. In 
all the towns of Algeria and Tunisia museums have been founded 
for storing the antiquities of the region; the most important of 
these are the museums of St Louis, Carthage and the palace of 
Bardo (musee Alaoui) near Tunis, those of Susa, Constantine, 
Lambessa, Timgad, Tebessa, Philippeville, Cherchel and Oran. 
Under the title of MusSes et collections arcMologiques de I' Algerie 
et de la Tunisie, the Ministry of Public Instruction publishes from 
time to time illustrated descriptions of all these archaeological 
treasures. In this collection have already appeared descriptions 
of the museums of Algiers by G. Doublet; of Constantine by 
G. Doublet and P. Gauckler; of Oran by R. de La Blanchere; 
of Cherchel by P. Gauckler; of Lambessa by R. Cagnat; of 
Philippeville by S. Gsell and Bertrand; of the Bardo by R. de La 
Blanchere and P. Gauckler; of Carthage by R. P. Delattre; of 
Tebessa by S. Gsell; of Susa by P. Gauckler; of Timgad by 
R. Cagnat and A. Ballu. 

The archaeological exploration of Algeria has kept pace with 
the expansion of French dominion. From 1846 to 1854 Delamarre 
published his Exploration archeologique de V Algerie, in collabora- 
tion with the French officers. In 1850 Leon Renier was officially 
instructed to collect all the inscriptions in Algeria which should 
be found by the military expeditionary columns. This scholar 
examined first the ruins of Lambessa, an account of which he 
published in 1854 in his Melanges d'ipigraphie; subsequently he 
made his important collection of Inscriptions romaines de l' Algirie 
(1855-1858) which formed the groundwork of the volume of the 
Corpus Inscr. Lot. of the Academy of Berlin, devoted to Roman 
Africa. A little later General Faidherbe published his Collection 
complete des inscriptions numidiques (1870). Apart from the 
province of Constantine, Algeria is less rich in Roman remains 
than Tunisia; mention must, however, be made of the excava- 
tions of Victor Waille at Cherchel, where were found fine statues 
in the Greek style of the time of King Juba II. ; of P. Gavault at 
Tigzirt (Rusuccuru), and finally of those of Stephane Gsell at 
Tipasa (basilica of St Salsa) and throughout the district of Setif 
and at Khamissa (Thuburticum Numidarum). In the depart- 
ment of Constantine, which is peculiarly rich in Roman remains, 
Tebessa has been most carefully explored by M. Heron de 
Villefosse. who has laid bare a beautiful temple of Jupiter, a 
triumphal arch of Caracalla, a Byzantine basilica and the gate 
of the Byzantine general Solomon. But all these ruins fade into 
insignificance in comparison with the majestic grandeur of those 
of Timgad which are almost entirely laid bare; they are de- 
scribed in Timgad, une cite africaine sous V empire romain, by 
R. Cagnat, G. Boeswillwald and A. Ballu. 

In Tunisia, Carthage early became the object of archaeo- 
logical investigation. Major Humbert was sent there by 
Napoleon in 1808 and his notes are still preserved in the museum 
of Leiden. Chateaubriand visited and described the ruins; 
the Dane Falbe, the Englishman Nathan Davis, Beule, P. de 
Sainte-Marie and others also have carried out researches; for 
more than twenty years Pere Delattre has explored the ruins of 
Carthage (q.v.) with extraordinary success. For the rest of 
Tunisia, the first explorer interested in archaeology was Victor 
Gu6rin in i860; his results are contained in his remarkable 
Voyage archiologique dans la R&gence de Tunis (1862, 2 vols.). 
A. Daux, in the years preceding 1869, explored the sites of the 



AFRICAN LILY— AFRIDI 



361 



ancient harbours of Utica, Hadrumetum, Thapsus (Dimas) . But 
it was the occupation of Tunisia by the French in 1881 which 
really gave the, impetus to modern investigations in this district 
of ruined cities. They were put on a solid foundation by the 
publication of the Geographie comparee of Charles Tissot (1884). 
Trained scholars were sent there annually by the French govern- 
ment: Cagnat, Saladin, Poinssot, La Blanchere, S. Reinach, 
E. Babelon, Carton, Audollent, Steph. Gsell, J. Toutain, Espe- 
randieu, Gauckler, Merlin, Homo and many others, to say 
nothing of German scholars, such as Willmans and Schulten, 
and especially of a great number of enthusiastic officers of the 
army of occupation, who explored all the ancient sites, and in 
many cases excavated with great success (for their results see 
the works quoted above). It would be impossible to enumerate 
here all the monographs describing, for example, the ruins of 
Carthage, those of the temple of the waters at Mount Zaghuan, 
the amphitheatre of El Jem (Thysdrus), the temple of Saturn, 
the royal tomb and the theatre of Dugga (Thugga), the 
bridge of Chemtu (Simitthu), the ruins and cemeteries of 
Tebursuk and Medeina (Althiburus) , the rich villa of the 
Laberii at Wadna {Uthina), the sanctuary of Saturn Balcara- 
nensis on the hill called Bu-Kornain, the ruins of the district of 
Enfida (Aphrodisium, Uppenna, Segermes), those of Leptis 
minor (Lemta), of Thenae (near Sfax), those of the island of 
Meninx (Jerba), of the peninsula of Zarzis, of Mactar, Sbeitla 
(Sufetula), Gigthis (Bu-Grara), Gafsa (Capsa), Kef (Sicca 
Veneria), Bulla Regia, &c. 

From this accumulation of results most valuable evidence 
as to the history and more especially the internal administration 
of Africa under the Romans has been derived. In particular 
we know how rural life was there developed, and with what care 
the water necessary for the growing of cereals was everywhere 
provided. Sculpture throughout the district is very provincial 
and of minor importance; the only exceptions are certain 
statues found at Carthage and Cherchel, the capital of the 
Mauretanian kings. 

Authorities. — Among general works on the subject may be 
mentioned: Morcelli, Africa Christiana (1816); Gustave Boissiere, 
L'Algerie romaine (2nd ed., 1883) ; E. Mercier, Histoire de I'Afrique 
septentrionale (1888) ; Charles Tissot, Geographie comparee de la 
province romaine d'Afrique (1884-1888), with atlas; Vivien de Saint- 
Martin, LeNord de I Afrique dans Vantiquite grecque et romaine (1883) ; 
Gaston Boissier, LAfrique romaine (1895); CI. Pallu de Lessert, 
Fastes des provinces africaines {Proconsulate, Numidie, Mauretanie) 
sous la domination romaine (1896-1901); R. Cagnat, L'Armee 
romaine d'Afrique (1892) ; A. Daux, Les Emporia pheniciens dais 
h Zeugis el le Byzacium (1869) ; Ludwig Muller, Numismaticue de 
I'ancienne Afrique (1860-1862; Supplement, 1874); Ch. Diehl, 
V Afrique byzantine (1896); Stephane Gsell, Recherches arckeo- 
logiques en Afrique (1893) ; Paul Monceaux, Histoire litteraire de 
I'Afrique chretienne (1901-1905) ; J. Toutain, Les Cites romaines de 
la Tunisie (1895); Adas archeologique de la Tunisie, published by 
the Ministry of Public Instruction (1895 foil.); Atlas archeologique 
de I'Algerie, published by Stephane Gsell (1900 foil.); Toulotte, 
GSographie de I'Afrique chretienne (1 892-1 894) ; Corpus inscriptionum 
latinarum, vol. viii. and Supplement (1881). Cf. also articles 
Carthage,Numidia, &c, JuGURTHA,and articles relating to Roman 
History. (E. B.*) 

AFRICAN LILY (Agapanthus umbellatus), a member of the 
natural order Liliaceae, a native of the Cape of Good Hope, 
whence it was introduced at the close of the 17th century. It is 
a handsome greenhouse plant, which is hardy in the south of 
England and Ireland if protected from severe frosts. It has a 
short stem bearing a tuft of long, narrow, arching leaves, 5 to 
2 ft. long, and a central flower-stalk, 2 to 3 ft. high, ending in an 
umbel of bright blue, funnel-shaped flowers. The plants are 
easy to cultivate, and are generally grown in large pots or tubs 
which can be protected from frost in winter. During the summer 
they require plenty of water, and are very effective on the 
margins of lakes or running streams, where they thrive admirably. 
They increase by offsets, or may be propagated by dividing the 
root-stock in early spring or autumn. A number of forms are 
known in cultivation; such are albidus, with white flowers, 
aureus, with leaves striped with yellow, and variegatus, with 
leaves almost entirely white with a few green bands. There are 
also double-flowered and larger and smaller flowered forms. 



AFRICANUS, SEXTUS JULIUS, a Christian traveUer and 
historian of the 3rd century, was probably born in Libya, and 
may have served under Septimius Severus against the Osrhoenians 
in a.d. 195. Little is known of his personal history, except that 
he lived at Emmaus, and that he went on an embassy to the 
emperor Heliogabalus 1 to ask for the restoration of the town, 
which had fallen into ruins. His mission succeeded, and Emmaus 
was henceforward known as Nicopolis. Dionysius bar-Salibi 
makes him a bishop, but probably he was not even a presbyter. 
He wrote a history oitheyfOild{Xpovoypa(j>iaL, in five books)from 
the creation to the year a.d. 221, a period, according to his 
computation, of 5723 years. He calculated the period between 
the creation and the birth of Christ as 5499 years, and ante-dated 
the latter event by three years. This method of reckoning 
became known as the Alexandrian era, and was adopted by 
almost all the eastern churches. The history, which had an 
apologetic aim, is no longer extant, but copious extracts from it 
are to be found in the Chronicon of Eusebius, who used it ex- 
tensively in compiling the early episcopal lists. There are also 
fragments in Syncellus, Cedrenus and the Paschale Chronicon. 
Eusebius {Hist. Ecc. i. 7, cf. vi. 31) gives some extracts from his 
letter to one Aristides, reconciling the apparent discrepancy 
between Matthew and Luke in the genealogy of Christ by a 
reference to the Jewish law, which compelled a man to marry 
the widow of his deceased brother, if the latter died without 
issue. His terse and pertinent letter to Origen, impugning the 
authority of the apocryphal book of Susanna, and Origen's 
wordy and uncritical answer, are both extant. The ascription 
to Africanus of an eacyclopaedic work entitled Ketrroi (em- 
broidered girdles), treating of agriculture, natural history, 
military science, &c, has been needlessly disputed on account 
of its secular and often credulous character. Neander suggests 
that it was written by Africanus before he had devoted himself 
to religious subjects. For a new fragment of this work see 
Oxyrhynchus Papyri (Grenfell and Hunt), iii. 36 ff. 

Authorities. — Edition in M. J. Routh, Rel. Sac. ii. 219-509; 
translation in Ante-Nicene Fathers (S. D. F. Salmond) vi. 125-140. 
See H. Gelzer, Sex. Jul. Africanus und die byzant. Chronographie, 
2 vols. (Leipzig, 1 880-1 885); G. Kriiger, Early Christian Literature, 
248-253; A. Harnack, Altchristl. Litt. Gesch. i. 507, ii. 70. 

AFRIDI, a Pathan tribe inhabiting the mountains on the 
Peshawar border of the North-West Frontier province of India. 
The Afridis are the most powerful and independent tribe on the 
border, and the largest with the exception of the Waziris. Their 
special country is the lower and easternmost spurs of the Safed 
Koh range, to the west and south of the Peshawar district, in- 
cluding the Bazar and Bara valleys. On their east they are 
bounded by British districts, on the north by the Mohmands, 
on the west by the Shinwaris and on the south by the Orakzai 
and Bangash tribes. Their origin is obscure, but they are said 
to have Israelitish blood in their veins, and they have a decidedly 
Semitic cast of features. They are possibly the Aparytai of 
Herodotus, the names and positions being identical. If this 
theory is correct, they were then a powerful people, and held 
a large tract of country, but have been gradually driven back 
by the encroachments of other tribes. The tribe is divided into 
the following eight clans: — Kuki Khel, Malikdin Khel, Kambar 
Khel, Kamar Khel, Zakka Khel (the most numerous and the 
most turbulent), Sipah, Aka Khel and Adam Khel. The first 
seven clans live in the vicinity of the Khyber Pass, and migrate 
to Tirah in the summer months. The Adam Khel (5900 fighting 
men) live round the Kohat Pass, and are more settled and less 
migratory in their habits. In appearance the Afridi is a fine, 
tall, athletic highlander with a long, gaunt face, high nose and 
cheek-bones, and a fair complexion. On his own hillside he is 
one of the finest skirmishers in the world, and in the Indian 
army makes a first-rate soldier, but he is apt to be home-sick 
when removed from the air of his native mountains. In character 
the Afridi has obtained an evil name for ferocity, craft and 
treachery, but Colonel Sir Robert Warburton, who lived eighteen 
years in charge of the Khyber Pass and knew the Afridi better 
than any other Englishman, says: — " The Afridi lad from his 
1 So Eusebius, Syncellus says Alexander Severus, 



362 



AFTERGLOW— AGA KHAN I. 



earliest childhood is taught by the circumstances of his existence 
and life to distrust all mankind, and very often his near relations, 
heirs to his small plot of land by right of inheritance, are his 
deadliest enemies. Distrust of all mankind, and readiness to 
strike the first blow for the safety of his own life, have therefore 
become the maxims of the Afridi. If you can overcome this 
mistrust, and be kind in words to him, he will repay you by a 
great devotion, and he will put up with any treatment you like 
to give him except abuse." In short the Afridi has the vices 
and virtues of all Pathans in an enhanced degree. The fighting 
strength of the Afridis is said to be 27,000, but this estimate is 
excessive, judged by the number and size of their villages. They 
derive their importance from their geographical position, which 
gives them command of the Khyber and Kohat roads, and the 
history of the British connexion with them has been almost 
entirely with reference to these two passes. 

There have been several British expeditions against the 
separate clans: — 

(1) Expedition against the Kohat Pass Afridis under Sir 
Colin Campbell in 1850. The British connexion with the Adam 
Khel Afridis commenced immediately after the annexation 
of the Peshawar and Kohat districts. Following the example 
of all previous rulers of the country, the British agreed to pay 
the tribe a subsidy to protect the pass. But in 1850 a thousand 
Afridis attacked a body of sappers engaged in making the road, 
killing twelve and wounding six. It was supposed that they 
disliked the making of a road which would lay open their fast- 
nesses to regular troops. An expedition of 3200 British troops 
was despatched, which traversed the country and punished them. 

(2) Expedition against the Jowaki Afridis of the Bori villages 
in 1853. When the Afridis of the Kohat Pass misbehaved in 
1850, the Jowaki Afridis offered the use of their route instead; 
but they turned out worse than the others, and in 1853 a force 
of 1700 British traversed their country and destroyed their 
stronghold at Bori. The Jowaki Afridis are a clan of the Adam 
Khel, who inhabit the country lying between the Kohat Pass 
and the river Indus. 

(3) Expedition against the Aka Khel Afridis under Colonel 
Craigie in 1855. In 1854 the Aka Khels, not finding themselves 
admitted to a share of the allowances of the Kohat Pass, com- 
menced a series of raids on the Peshawar border and attacked a 
British camp. An expedition of 1500 troops entered the country 
and inflicted severe punishment on the tribe, who made their 
submission and paid a fine. 

(4) Expedition against the Jowaki Afridis under Colonel 
Mocatta in 1877. In that year the government proposed to 
reduce the Jowaki allowance for guarding the Kohat Pass, and 
the tribesmen resented this by cutting the telegraph wire and. 
raiding into British territory. A force of 1500 troops penetrated 
their country in three columns, and did considerable damage 
by way of punishment. 

(5) Expedition against the Jowaki Afridis under Brigadier- 
General Keyes in 1877-78. The punishment inflicted by the 
previous expedition did not prove sufficiently severe, the attitude 
of the Jowakis continued the same and their raids into British 
territory went on. A much stronger force, therefore, of 7400 
British troops, divided into three columns, destroyed their 
principal villages and occupied their country for some time, 
until the tribe submitted and accepted government terms. The 
Kohat Pass was afterwards practically undisturbed. 

(6) Expedition against the Zakka Khel Afridis of the Bazar 
Valley under Brigadier- General Tytler in 1878. At the time of 
the British advance into Afghanistan, during the second Afghan 
War, the Zakka Khel opposed the British advance and attacked 
their outposts. A force of 2500 British troops traversed their 
country, and the tribesmen made their submission. 

(7) Expedition against the Zakka Khel Afridis of the Bazar 
Valley under Lieutenant-General Maude in 1879. After the 
previous expedition the Afridis of the Khyber Pass continued 
to give trouble during the progress of the second Afghan War, 
so another force of 3750 British troops traversed their country, 
and after suffering some loss the tribesmen made their submission. 



After this both the Khyber and Kohat Passes were put on a 
stable footing, and no further trouble of any consequence occurred 
in either down to the time of the frontier risings of 1897, when 
the Afridis attacked the Khyber Pass, which was defended by 
Afridi levies. 

(8) For the Tirah Campaign of 1897 see Tirah Campaign. 

(9) In the February of 1908 the restlessness of the Zakka Khel 
again made a British expedition necessary, under Sir James 
Willcocks; but the campaign was speedily ended, though in the 
following April he had again to proceed against the Mohmands, 
the situation being complicated by an incursion from Afghanistan. 

See also Paget and Mason's Frontier Expeditions (1884) ; War- 
burton's Eighteen Y.ears in the Khyber (1900). (C. L.) , r 

AFTERGLOW, a broad high arch of whitish or rosy light 
appearing occasionally in the sky above the highest clouds in 
the hour of deepening twilight, or reflected from the high snow- 
fields in mountain regions long after sunset. The phenomenon 
is due to very fine particles of dust suspended in the high regions 
of the atmosphere that produce a scattering effect upon the 
component parts of white light. After the eruption of Krakatoa 
in 1883, a remarkable series of red sunsets appeared all over the 
world. These were due to an enormous amount of exceedingly 
fine dust blown to a great height by that terrific explosion, and 
then universally diffused by the high atmospheric currents. 

AFZELIUS, ADAM (1750-1837), Swedish botanist, was born 
at Larf, Vestergotland, in 1750. He was appointed teacher of 
oriental languages at Upsala in 1777, and in 1785 demonstrator 
of botany. From 1792 he spent some years on the west coast 
of Africa, and in 1 797-1 798 acted as secretary of the Swedish 
embassy in London. Returning to Sweden, he founded the 
Linnaean institute at Upsala in 1802, and in 181 2 became 
professor of materia medica at the university. He died at Upsala 
in 1837. In addition to various botanical writings, he published 
the autobiography of Linnaeus in 1823. 

His brother, Johan Afzelius (i753-i837),known as Arvtdson, 
was professor of chemistry at Upsala; and another brother, 
Per af (1 760-1843), who became professor of medicine at Upsala 
in 1801, was distinguished as a medical teacher and practitioner. 

AFZELIUS, ARVID AUGUST (1785-1871), Swedish pastor, 
poet, historian and mythologist, was born on the 8th of October 
1785. From 1828 till his death on the 25th of September 1871 
he was parish priest of Enkoping. He is mainly known as a 
collaborator with the learned historian, Erik Gustaf Geijer, in the 
great collection of Swedish folk-songs, Svenske folkirsor jran 
forntiden, 3 vols. (Stockholm, 1814-1816). He published also 
translations of the Samunder Edda and Herwara-Saga, and a 
history of Sweden to Charles XII. (of which a German transla- 
tion was published in 1842), as well as original poems. 

AGA, or Agha, a word, said to be of Tatar origin, signifying 
a dignitary or lord. Among the Turks it is applied to the chief 
of the janissaries, to the commanders of the artillery, cavalry 
and infantry, and to the eunuchs in charge of the seraglio. It 
is also employed generally as a term of respect in addressing 
wealthy men of leisure, landowners, &c. 

AGAIAMBO, or Agaumbu, a race of dwarf marsh-dwellers in 
British New Guinea, now almost extinct. In his annual report 
for 1904 the acting administrator of British New Guinea stated 
that on a visit he paid to their district he saw six males and four 
females. The Agaiambo five in huts erected on piles in the lakes 
and marshes. Dwarfish in stature but broadly built, they are 
remarkable for the shortness of their legs. They live almost 
entirely in their " dug-outs " or canoes, or actually wading in 
the water. Their food consists of sago, the roots of the water- 
lily and fish. The Agaiambo are believed to have been formerly 
numerous, but within the last few years have suffered from the 
raids of their cannibalistic Papuan neighbours. In features, 
colour and hair they closely resemble the true Papuans. 

AGA KHAN I., His Highness the (1800-1881), the title 
accorded by general consent to Hasan Ali Shah (born in Persia, 
1800), when, in early life, he first settled in Bombay under the 
protection of the British government. He was believed to have 
descended in direct line from Ali by his wife Fatima, the daughter 



AGALMATOLITE— AGAMEMNON 



363 



•of the Prophet Mahomet. Ali's son, Hosain, having married 
a daughter of one of the rulers of Persia before the time of 
Mahomet, the Aga Khan traced his descent from the royal 
house of Persia from the most remote, almost prehistoric, times. 
His ancestors had also ruled in Egypt as caliphs of the Beni- 
Fatimites for a number of years, at a period coeval with the 
Crusades. Before the Aga Khan emigrated from Persia, he was 
appointed by the emperor Fateh Ali Shah to be governor-general 
of the extensive and important province of Kerman. His rule 
was noted for firmness, moderation and high political sagacity, 
and he succeeded for a long time in retaining the friendship and 
confidence of his master the shah, although his career was beset 
with political intrigues and jealousy on the part of rival and 
court favourites, and with internal turbulence. At last, however, 
the fate usual to statesmen in oriental countries overtook him, 
and he incurred the mortal displeasure of Fateh Ali Shah. He 
fled from Persia and sought protection in British territory, 
preferring to settle down eventually in India, making Bombay 
his headquarters. At that period the first Afghan War was at 
its height, and in crossing over from Persia through Afghanistan 
the Aga Khan found opportunities of rendering valuable services 
to the British army, and thus cast in his lot for ever with the 
British. A few years later he rendered similar conspicuous 
services in the course of the Sind campaign, when his help was 
• utilized by Napier in the process of subduing the frontier tribes, 
a large number of whom acknowledged the Aga's authority as 
their spiritual head. Napier held his Moslem ally in great 
esteem, and entertained a very high opinion of his political 
acumen and chivalry as a leader and soldier. The Aga Khan 
reciprocated the British commander's confidence and friendship 
by giving Tepeated proofs of his devotion and attachment to 
the British government, and when he finally settled down in 
India, his position as the leader of the large Ismailiah section of 
Mahommedan British subjects was recognized by the govern- 
ment, and the title of His Highness was conferred on him, with 
a large pension. From that time until his death in 1881 the Aga 
Khan, while leading the life of a peaceful and peacemaking 
citizen, under the protection of British rule, continued to dis- 
charge his sacerdotal functions, not only among his followers 
in India, but towards the more numerous communities which 
acknowledged his religious sway in distant countries, such as 
Afghanistan, Khorasan, Persia, Arabia, Central Asia, and even 
distant Syria and Morocco. He remained throughout unflinch- 
ingly loyal to the British Raj, and by his vast and unquestioned 
influence among the frontier tribes on the northern borders of 
India he exercised a control over their unruly passions in times 
of trouble, which proved of invaluable service in the several 
expeditions led by British arms on the north-west frontier of 
India. He was also the means of checking the fanaticism of the 
more turbulent Mahommedans in British India, which in times 
of internal troubles and misunderstandings finds vent in the shape 
of religious or political riots. 

He was succeeded by his eldest son, Aga Khan II. This prince 
continued the traditions and work of his father in a manner that 
won the approbation of the local government, and earned for him 
the distinction of a knighthood of the Order of the Indian Empire 
and a seat in the legislative council of Bombay. 

Aga Khan III. (Sultan Mahommed Shah), only son of the 
foregoing, succeeded him on his death in 1885, and became the 
head of the family and its devotees. He was born in 1877, and, 
under the care of his mother, a daughter of the ruling house of 
Persia, was given not only that religious and oriental education 
which his position as the religious leader of the Ismailiahs made 
indispensable, but a sound European training, a boon denied to 
his father and grandfather. This blending of the two systems of 
education produced the happy result of fitting this Moslem chief 
in an eminent degree both for the sacerdotal functions which 
appertain to his spiritual position, and for those social duties of 
a great and enlightened leader which he was called upon to dis- 
charge by virtue of that position. He travelled in distant parts 
of the world to receive the homage of his followers, and with the 
pbject either of settling differences or of advancing their welfare 



by pecuniary help and personal advice and guidance. The dis- 
tinction of a knight commander of the Indian Empire was con- 
ferred upon him by Queen Victoria in 1897, and he received like 
recognition for his public services from the German emperor, the 
sultan of Turkey, the shah of Persia and other potentates. 

See Naoroji M. Dumasia, A Brief History of the Aga Khan 
(1903). (M. M. Bh.) 

AGALMATOLITE (from Gr. &ya\/ia, statue, and Xt0os, 
stone), a soft species of mineral, also called pagodite, used by the 
Chinese for carving, especially into grotesque figures (whence 
called " figure-stone "). 

AGAMKDES, in Greek legend, son of Erginus, king of Orcho- 
menus in Boeotia. He is always associated with his brother 
Trophonius as a wonderful architect, the constructor of under- 
ground shrines and grottos for the reception of hidden treasure. 
When building a treasure-house for Hyrieus, the brothers fixed 
one of the stones in the wall so that they could remove it whenever 
they pleased, and from time to time carried off some of the 
treasure. Hyrieus thereupon set a trap in which Agamedes was 
caught; Trophonius, to prevent discovery, cut off his brother's 
head and fled with it. He was pursued by Hyrieus, and swal- 
lowed up by the earth in the grove of Lebadeia. On this spot 
was the oracle of Trophonius in an underground cave; those 
who wished to consult it first offered the sacrifice of a ram and 
called upon the name of Agamedes. A similar story is told of 
Rhampsinitus by Herodotus (ii. 121). According to Pindar (apud 
Plutarch), the brothers built the temple of Apollo at Delphi; 
when they asked for a reward, the god promised them one in 
seven days; on the seventh day they died. 

Pausanias ix. 37; Plutarch, Consolatio ad Apollonium, 14; 
Cicero, Tusc. Disp. i. 47. 

AGAMEMNON, one of the most distinguished of the Greek 
heroes, was the son of Atreus (king of Mycenae) and Aerope, 
grandson of Pelops, great-grandson of Tantalus and brother of 
Menelaus. Another account makes him the son of Pleisthenes 
(the son or father of Atreus), who is said to have been Aerope's 
first husband. Atreus was murdered by Aegisthus (q.v.), who 
took possession of the throne of Mycenae and ruled jointly 
with his father Thyestes. During this period Agamemnon and 
Menelaus took refuge with Tyndareus, king of Sparta, whose 
daughters Clytaemnestra (more correctly Clytaemestra) and 
Helen they respectively married. By Clytaemnestra, Agamemnon 
had three daughters, Iphigeneia (Iphianassa), Electra (Laodice), 
Chrysothemis, and a son, Orestes. Menelaus succeededTyndareus, 
and Agamemnon, with his brother's assistance, droveout Aegisthus 
and Thyestes, and recovered his father's kingdom. He extended 
his dominion by conquest and became the most powerful prince 
in Greece. When Paris (Alexander), son of Priam, had carried off 
his brother's wife, he went round to the princes of the country and 
called upon them to unite in a war of revenge against the Trojans. 
He himself furnished 100 ships, and was chosen commander-in- 
chief of the combined forces. The fleet, numbering 1200 ships, 
assembled at the port of Aulis in Boeotia. But Agamemnon had 
offended the goddess Artemis by slaying a hind sacred to her, and 
boasting himself a better hunter. The army was visited by a 
plague, and the fleet was prevented from sailing by the total 
absence of wind. Calchas announced that the wrath of the 
goddess could only be appeased by the sacrifice of Iphigeneia 
(q.v.). The fleet then set sail. Little is heard of Agamemnon 
until his quarrel with Achilles (q.v.). After the capture of Troy, 
Cassandra, the daughter of Priam, fell to his lot in the distribution 
of the prizes of war. On his return, after a stormy voyage, he 
landed in Argolis. His kinsman, Aegisthus, who in the interval 
had seduced his wife Clytaemnestra, invited him to a banquet at 
which he was treacherously slain, Cassandra also being put to 
death by Clytaemnestra. According to the account given by 
Pindar and the tragedians, Agamemnon was slain by his wife 
alone in a bath, a piece of cloth or a net having first been thrown 
over him to prevent resistance. Her wrath at the sacrifice of 
Iphigeneia, and her jealousy of Cassandra, are said to have been 
the motives of her Crime, The murder of Agamemnon was 
avenged by his son Orestes (q.v.). Although not the equal of 



364 



AGAPE 



Achilles in bravery, Agamemnon is a dignified representative 
of kingly authority. As commander-in-chief, he summons the 
princes to the council and leads the army in battle. He takes the 
field himself, and performs many heroic deeds until he is wounded 
and forced to withdraw to his tent. His chief fault is his over- 
weening haughtiness, due to an over-exalted opinion of his 
position, which leads him to insult Chryses and Achilles, thereby 
bringing great disaster upon the Greeks. But his family had been 
marked out for misfortune from the outset. His kingly office had 
come to him from Pelops through the blood-stained hands of 
Atreus and Thyestes, and had brought with it a certain fatality 
which explained the hostile destiny which pursued him. The 
fortunes of Agamemnon have formed the subject of numerous 
tragedies, ancient and modern, the most famous being the 
Oresteia of Aeschylus. In the legends of Peloponnesus, Agamem- 
non was regarded as the highest type of a powerful monarch, and 
in Sparta he was worshipped under the title of Zeus Agamemnon. 
His tomb was pointed out among the ruins of Mycenae and at 
Amyclae. 

In works of art there is considerable resemblance between the 
representations of Zeus, king of the gods, and Agamemnon, king 
of men. He is generally characterized by the sceptre and diadem, 
the usual attributes of kings. 

See articles in Pauly-Wissowa's Realencydopadie and Roscher's 
Lexikon der Mythologie. : , 

AGAPE (Gr. 070x77, " Love "), the early Christian love- 
feast. The word seems to be used in this sense in the epistle of 
Jude 12: " These are they who are hidden rocks in your love- 
feasts when they banquet with you." But this is not certain, 
for in 2 Pet. ii. 13 the verse is cited, but reading axdrais 
(" deceits ") for 070x01$, and the oldest MSS. hesitate. The 
history of the agape coincides, until the end of the 2nd century, 
with that of the eucharist (q.v.), and it is doubtful whether the 
following detailed account of the agape given in Tertullian's 
Apology (c. 39) is to be regarded as exclusive of an accompanying 
eucharist: " It is the banquet (triclinium) alone of the Christians 
that is criticised. Our supper (coena) shows its character by its 
name. It is called by a word which in Greek signifies love {i.e. 
agape) . Whatever it costs, it is anyhow a clear gain that it is 
incurred on the score of piety, seeing that we succour the poorest 
by such entertainments (refrigerio) . We do not lie down at table 
until prayer has been offered to God, as it were a first taste. We 
eat only to appease our hunger, we drink only so much as it is 
good for temperate persons to do. If we satisfy our appetites, 
we do so without forgetting that throughout the night we must 
say our prayers to God. If we converse, it is with the knowledge 
that the Lord is listening. After washing our hands and lighting 
the lamps, each is invited to sing a hymn before all to God, either 
taken from holy writ or of his own composition. So we prove 
him, and see how well he has drunk. Prayer ends, as it began, 
the banquet; and we break up not in bands of brigands, nor in 
groups of vagabonds, nor do we burst out into debauchery. . . . 
This meeting of Christians we admit deserves to be made illicit, 
if it resembles illicit acts; it deserves to be condemned, if any 
complain of it on the same score on which complaints are levelled 
at factious meetings. But to do harm to whom do we ever thus 
come together ? " 

The evidence of Tertullian is good for Africa. But in Egypt 
about the same time (180-210), Clement of Alexandria in his 
Pedagogus (ii. 1) condemns the " little suppers which were called, 
not without presumption, agape." This word, he complains, 
should denote the heavenly food, the reasonable feast alone, and 
the Lord never used it of mere junketings. Clement wished the 
name to be reserved for the eucharist, because the love-feasts 
of the church had degenerated, as Tertullian too discovered, 
as soon as he turned Montanist. For in his tract on fasting 
(ch. xvii.) he complains that the young men misbehaved with the 
sisters after the agape. 

Among the spurious works of Athanasius is printed a tract 
entitled About Virginity, ch. xiii. of which directs how the sisters 
after the synaxis of the ninth hour (3 p.m.) are to dine: " When 
you sit down at a table and come to break bread, seal it thrice 



with the sign of the cross and thus give thanks : ' We thank thee, 
our Father, for thy holy resurrection; for through Jesus thy 
Servant thou hast shewn it unto us. And as this bread on this 
table was scattered, but has been brought together and become 
one, so may thy church be brought together into thy kingdom. 
For thine is the power and the glory, for ever and ever, Amen.' 
This prayer as you break the bread, and are about to eat, you 
must say. And when you lay it on the table and desire to eat it, 
repeat the ' Gur Father ' entire. But after dinner (or breakfast), 
and when we rise from table, we use the prayer given above, viz. 
' Blessed be God, who hath pity and nourisheth us from our 
infancy, who giveth food to all flesh. Fill pur hearts with joy 
and gladness, that ever having of all things a sufficiency, we 
may superabound in all good works, in Christ Jesus our Lord, 
&c.' " The writer then enjoins that, " if two or three other virgins 
are present, they also shall give thanks over the bread set out, 
and join in the prayers. But if a catechumen be found at the 
table, she shall not be suffered to join with the full believers in 
their prayers, nor shall the latter sit with her to eat the morsel " 
(^oj/i6c, used specially of the sanctified bread). " Nor shall 
they sit with frivolous and joking women, if they can help it, 
for they are sanctified to God, and their food and drink have 
been hallowed by the prayers and holy words used over them. 
... If a rich woman sits down with them at table, and they 
see a poor woman, they shall invite her also to eat with them, 
and not put her to shame because of the rich one." The last 
words echo 1 Cor. x., and the prayer is nearly the same as that 
which the teaching of the Apostles assigns for the eucharistic 
rite. Here, then, we have pictured as late as the 4th century a 
Lord's supper, which like the one described in 1 Cor. x. is agape 
and eucharist in one, and it is held in a private house and not 
in church, and the celebrants are holy women! 

The historian Socrates {Hist. Eccl. v. 22) testifies to the 
survival in Egypt of such Lord's suppers as were love-feasts 
and eueharists in one. Around Alexandria and in the Thebaid, 
he says, they hold services on the sabbath, and unlike other 
Christians partake of the mysteries (i.e. sacrament): For after 
holding good cheer and filling themselves with meats of all kinds, 
they at eventide make the offering (xpew^opo) and partake of it. 
So Basil of Cappadocia (Epistle 93), about the year 350; records 
that in Egypt the laity, as a rule, celebrated the communion in 
their own houses, and partook of the sacrament by themselves 
whenever they chose. In the old Egyptian church order, known 
as the Canons of Hippolytus, there are numerous directions for 
the service of the agape, held on Sundays, ' saints' days or at 
commemorations of the dead. The 74th canon of the council 
of Trullo (a.d. 692) forbade the holding of symposia known as 
agapes in church. In his 54th homily (torn. v. p. 365) Chrysos- 
tom describes how after the eucharistic synaxis was over, the 
faithful remained in church, while the rich' brought out meats 
and drink from their houses, and invited the poor, and furnished 
" common tables, common banquets, common symposia in the 
church itself." The council of Gangra (a.d. 355) anathematized 
the over-ascetic people who despised " the agapes based on 
faith." Only a few years later, however, the council of Laodicea 
forbade the holding of agapes in churches. The 42nd canon of 
the council of Carthage under Aurelius likewise forbade them, 
but these were only local councils. In the age of Chrysostom 
and Augustine the agape was frequent. 

In the east Syrian, the Armenian and the Georgian churches, 
respectively Nestorian, Monophysite and Greek Orthodox in 
their tenets, the agape was from the first a survival, under 
Christian and Jewish forms, of the old sacrificial systems of a 
pre-Christian age. Sheep, rams, bullocks, fowls are given 
sacrificial salt to lick, and then sacrificed by the priest and 
deacon, who has the levitical portions of the victim as his per- 
quisite. In Armenia the Greek word agape has been used ever 
since the 4th century to indicate these sacrificial meals, which 
either began or ended with a • eucharistic celebration. The 
earlier usage of the Armenians is expressed in the two following 
rules recorded against them by a renegade Armenian prelate 
named Isaac, who in the 8th century went over to the Byzantine 



AGAPEMONITES 



3 6 5 



church: "Christ did not hand down to us the teaching to 
celebrate the mystery of the offering of the bread in church, but 
in an ordinary house, and sitting at a common table. So then 
let them not sacrifice the offering of bread in churches. It was 
after supper, when his disciples were thoroughly sated, that 
Christ gave them of his own body to eat. Therefore let them 
first eat meats and be sated, and then let them partake of the 
mysteries." These old canons are adduced by way of ridiculing 
the Armenians, yet they reflect old usage. They are given in 
the Historia M onothelitarum of Combefisius, col. 317. Older 
MSS. of the Greek Euchologion contain numerous prayers to be 
offered over animals sacrificed; and in the form of agape such 
sacrifices were common in Italy and Gaul on the natalis dies 
of a saint, and Paulinus' of Nola, the friend of Augustine, in his 
Latin poems, describes them (c. 400) in detail. Gregory the Great 
sent to Mellitus, bishop of London, a written rite of sacrificing 
bulls for use in the English church of the early 7th century. 
In Augustine's work against Faustus the Manichean (xx. 4); the 
latter taxes the Catholics with having turned the sacrifices of the 
heathen into agapis, their idols into martyrs, whom they worship 
with similar rites. " You appease," he says, " the shades of 
the dead with wines and banquets, you celebrate the feast-days 
of the heathen along with them ... in their -way of living 
you have certainly changed nothing." This was true enough, 
but there is truth also in the remark of Prof. Sanday (" Eucha- 
rist " in Hastings' Dictionary of the Bible) that Providence even 
in its revolutions is conservative. The world could only be 
christianized on condition that old holy days and customs were 
continued. The early Christian agape admitted of adaptation 
to the older funeral and sacrificial feasts, and was so adapted. 
The association in the synoptics of the earliest eucharist with 
the paschal sacrifice provided a model, and long after the 
eucharist was separated with the agape on other days of the 
year, we still find celebrated on the evening of Maundy Thursday 
the sacrifice of the paschal lamb, immediately followed by an 
eucharist. The 41st canon of the council of Carthage enacted 
that the sacraments of the altar should be received fasting, 
except on the anniversary of the Lord's supper. It is clear 
that at an earlier date the agapS preceded the eucharist. 

Pagan Analogues. — In ancient states common meals called 
sussitia {avaoiria) were instituted, particularly in the Doric 
states, e.g. in Lacaedemon and in Crete. Plato advocated them, 
and perhaps the later Jews imitated the Spartan community. 
Trade and other gilds in antiquity held subscription suppers or 
ipavoi, similar to those of the early Corinthian church, usually 
to support the needs of the poorer members. These hetairiae 
or clubs were forbidden (except in cities formally allied to Rome) 
by Trajan and other emperors, as being likely to be centres of 
disaffection; and on this ground Pliny forbade the agape of the 
Bithynian churches, Christianity not being a lawful religion 
licensed for such gatherings. The custom which most resembles 
the eucharist and agape was that known as charistia described by 
Valerius Maximus ii. 1. 8. It was a solemn feast attended only 
by members of one clan, at which those who had quarrelled 
were at the sacrament of the table (apud sacra mensae) reconciled. 
It was held on the 20th of February. Ovid in his Fasti, ii. 
617, alludes to it — 

Proximo cognati dixere charistia cari, 
Et venit ad socios turba propinqua deos. 

Authorities. — " The Canons of Hippolytus," in Duchesne's 
Origines du culte Chretien (Paris, 1898)^ A. Allen, Christian Insti- 
tutions (London, 1898); P. Batiffol, Etudes d'histoire (Paris, 1902 
and 1905) ; F. X. Funk, " L'Agape," in the Revue de I'histoire ecclesi- 
astique (Louvain, Jan. 1903) ; Ad. Harnack, " Brod und Wasser " 
(Texte und Untersuch. vii. 2, Leipzig, 1891); J. F. Keating, The 
Agape and the Eucharist (London, 1901); F. X. Kraus, arts. 
" Agapen " and " Mahle " in the Realencykhp. d. christl. Altertiimer ; 
P. Ladeuze, " L'Eucharistie et les repas communs " in the Revue de 
F orient Chretien, No. 3, 1902; Sir W. M. Ramsay, The Church in the 
Roman Empire (London, 1894); A. Spitta, Zur Geschichte und 
Litteratur (Gottingen, 1893) ; E. von der Goltz, Das Gebet in dltesten 
Christianheit (Leipzig, I 901); F. E. Warren, The Liturgy and Ritual 
of the Antenicene Church (London, 1897) ; T. 2ahn, art. " Agapen " 
in Hauck's Realencyklop.; F. C. Conybeare, Rituale Armenorum 
(Oxford, 1905; it contains the oldest Latin and Greek forms), The 



Key of Truth (Oxford, 1898), and art. on "The Survival of Animal 
Sacrifices " in the American Journal of Theology (Chicago, Jan. 1903) ; 
F. X. Funk, Didascalia et Constitutiones Apostolorum (Paderborn, 
1906) ; V. Ermohi, L'Agape (Paris, 1904) ; G. Horner, The Statutes 
of the Apostles, translated from Ethiopic and Arabic MSS. (London, 
1904) ; Thefr. Drescher, Diss, de vet. Chrisiianorum Agapis (Giesse, 
1824); L. A. Muratori, Anecdota Graeca, " De agapis sublatis " 
(Patavii, 1709); I. A. Fabricius, Bibliogr. Ant. p. 587; Muenter, 
Primord. Eccl. Afr. p. in ; Walafrid Strabo, De Rebus Eccles. capita 
18, 19; Gregory of Tours, De miraculis S. Juliani, xxxi. ; Paulini 
Nolani Carmen xii. in S. Felicem. (F. C. C.) 

AGAPEMONITES, or Community of the Son of Man. This 
sect, based upon the theories of various German religious mystics, 
and having for its primary object the spiritualization of the 
matrimonial state, was founded in 1846 by the Rev. Henry 
James Prince, a clergyman of the Church of England (181 1-1899). 
He studied medicine, obtained his qualifications in 1832 and was 
appointed medical officer to the General Hospital in Bath, his 
native city. Compelled by ill-health to abandon his profession, 
he entered himself in 1837 as a student at St. David's Theo- 
logical College, Lampeter, where he gathered about him a band 
of earnest religious enthusiasts, known as the Lampeter Brethren, 
and was eventually ordained to the curacy of Charlinch in 
Somerset, where he had sole charge in the illness and absence 
of the rector, the Rev. Samuel Starkey. By that time he had 
contracted his first " spiritual marriage," and had persuaded 
hirnself that he had been absorbed into the personality of God 
and had become a visible embodiment of the Holy Spirit. During 
his illness Mr. Starkey read one of his curate's sermons, and was 
not only " cured " forthwith, but embraced his strange doctrines, 
and together they procured many conversions in the countryside 
and the neighbouring towns. In the end the rector was deprived 
of his living and Prince's licence withdrawn, and together with 
a few disciples they started the Charlinch Free Church, which 
had a very brief existence. Prince shortly afterwards became 
curate of Stoke in Suffolk, where, however, the character of 
his revivalist zeal caused his departure at the end of twelve 
months. It was now decided that Prince, Starkey (whose sister 
Prince had married as his second wife) and the Rev. Lewis 
Prince should leave the Church of England and preach their 
own gospel; Prince opened Adullam Chapel, Brighton, and 
Starkey established himself at Weymouth. The chief success 
lay in the latter town, and thither Prince soon migrated. A 
number of followers, estimated by Prince at 500, but by his 
critics at one-fifth of the number, were got together, and it was 
given out by " Beloved " or " The Lamb " — -the names by which 
the Agapemonites designated their leader — that his disciples 
must divest themselves of their possessions and throw them 
into the common stock. This was done, even by the poor or ill- 
furnished, all of whom looked forward to the speedy end of the 
present dispensation, and were content, for the short remainder 
of this world, to live in common, and, while not repudiating 
earthly ties, to treat them as purely spiritual. With the money 
thus obtained the house at Spaxton, which was to become the 
" Abode of Love," was enlarged and furnished luxuriously, and 
three sisters, who contributed £6000 each, were immediately 
married to three of Prince's nearest disciples. Despite the 
purely spiritual ideas which underlay the Agapemonite view 
of marriage, a son was born to one of these couples, and when 
the father endeavoured to carry it away an action was brought 
which resulted in the affirmation of the mother's right to its 
custody. The circumstance in which a fourth sister who joined 
the community was abducted by her brothers led to an inquiry 
in lunacy and to her final settlement at Spaxton. A few years 
after the establishment of the " Abode of Love," a peculiarly 
gross scandal, in which Prince and one of his female followers 
were involved, led to the secession of some of his most faithful 
friends, who were unable any longer to endure what they regarded 
as the amazing mixture of blasphemy and immorality offered 
for their acceptance. The most prominent of those who remained 
received such titles as the " Anointed Ones," the " Angel of 
the Last Trumpet," the " Seven Witnesses " and so forth. In 
1862 " Brother Prince " sent " to the kings and people of the 
earth " letters " making known to all men that flesh is saved 



3 66 



AGAPETAE— AGASSIZ 



from death." At that period the Agapemonites counted their 
adherents at 600, and it was no doubt a grievous shock to them 
when their deathless founder died on the 8th of March 1899, 
four years after he had opened a branch church at Clapton, 
London, which is said to have cost £20,000. This church, 
decorated with elaborate symbolism, was styled the " Ark of 
the Covenant," and in it the elect were to await the coming of 
the Lord. 

On the death of " Brother " Prince, the Rev. T. H. Smyth- 
Pigott, pastor of the " Ark," became the acknowledged head 
of the sect. He was born in 1852, of an old Somersetshire county 
family, and, after a varied career as university man, sailor before 
the mast, soldier, coffee-planter, curate in the Church of England 
and evangelist in the Salvation Army, was converted about 
1897 to the views of Prince. For five years after this he was 
not heard of outside his own sect. On the 7 th of September 
1902, however, the congregation, assembled at the Ark of the 
Covenant for service, found ihe communion table replaced by 
a chair. In this Pigott presently seated himself and proclaimed 
himself as the Messiah with the words, " God is no longer there," 
pointing upwards, " but here," pointing to himself. This aston- 
ishing announcement was followed by an excellent sermon on 
Christian love. Pigott's claim was at once admitted by the 
members of his sect, including even his own wife, as the ful- 
filment of the^promise of Christ to appear in due time in the 
"Ark." By the outside world the affair was greeted with mingled 
ridicule and indignation, and the new Messiah had to be pro- 
tected by the police from the violence of an angry mob. After 
providing " copy " for the newspapers for a few days, however, 
the whole thing was forgotten. Pigott retired to the head- 
quarters of the sect, the " Abode of Love " in Somerset, and all 
efforts to interview him or to obtain details of the life of the 
community were abortive. At last, in August 1905, the long 
and mysterious silence was broken by the announcement that 
a son had been born to Pigott by his " spiritual wife," Miss Ruth 
Preece, an inmate of the Agapemone. This event by no means 
disconcerted the believers, who saw in it only another manifesta- 
tion of Pigott's divinity, and proclaimed it as " an earnest of 
the total redemption of man." The child was registered as 
" Glory," and, at the christening service in the chapel of the 
Abode, hymns were sung in its honour as it lay in a jewelled 
cradle in the chancel. Another child by Miss Preece, christened 
" Power," was born on the 20th of August 1908. The publicity 
given to this event renewed the scandal, and in November an 
attempt to " tar and feather " Mr Pigott resulted in two men 
being sent to prison. Later in the month proceedings were 
instituted against him by the bishop of Bath and Wells under 
the Clergy Discipline Act. 

One outcome of the disclosures connected with the Agapemone 
deserves passing mention, as throwing some light on the origin of 
the wealth of the community. Mr Charles Stokes Read, a resident 
at the Agapemone and director of the V. V. Bread Company, was 
requested by his fellow-directors to resign, on the ground that his 
connexion with the sect was damaging the business of the company. 
He denied this to be the case and refused to resign, pleading religious 
liberty and the large interests of Agapemonites in the coricern. On 
the 13th of September 1905, a meeting of the shareholders of the 
company was held, and Read " asked them to believe that it was not 
in the interests of the company, but because he knew that the Lord 
Jesus Christ had come again and was now dwelling at the Agapemone, 
that he was thus cast out by his colleagues." The motion calling on 
him to resign was carried on a poll being taken by 46,770 votes to 
2 953- (See The Times, 14th of September 1905.) 

AGAPETAE, a class of " virgins " who, in the church of the 
early middle ages, lived with professedly celibate monks to whom 
they were said to be united by spiritual love. The practice was 
suppressed by the Lateran Council of 1139. 

AGAPETUS, the name of two popes; — 

Agapetxji I., pope from 535 to 536. He was an enlightened 
pontiff and collaborated with Cassiodorus in founding at Rome 
a library of ecclesiastical authors. King Theodahad sent him 
on an embassy to Constantinople, where he died, after having 
deposed.;<Anthimus, the monophysite bishop of that town, and 
ordained Menas his successor. 

Agapetus II., pope from 946 to 95s* at the time when Alberic, 



son of Marozia, was governing the independent republic of 
Rome under the title of " prince and senator of the Romans." 
Agapetus, a man of some force of character, did his best to put 
a stop to the degradation into which the papacy had fallen, 
the so-called " Pornocracy," which lasted from the accession 
of Sergius III. in 004 to the deposition of John XII. in 963. His 
appeal to Otto the Great to intervene in.Rome remained without 
immediate effect, since Alberic's position was too strong to be 
attacked, but it bore fruit after his death. Agapetus died on 
the 8th of November 955. - 

AGAPETUS, a deacon of the church of St Sophia at Constan- 
tinople. He presented to the emperor Justinian, on his ac- 
cession in 527, a work entitled Scheda regia sive de officio regis, 
which contained advice on the duties of a Christian prince. The 
work was often reprinted and is included in Dom Anselme 
Banduri's Imperium Orientate (Paris, 1711). There is an English 
translation by Thomas Paynell (1550) and a French trans- 
lation, executed in 1612 from a Latin version by Louis XIII., 
with the assistance of his tutor, David Rivault. 

AGARPE, ARTHUR (1540-1615), English antiquary,, was 
born at Foston, Derbyshire, in 1540. He was trained as a lawyer, 
but entered the exchequer as a clerk. - On the authority of 
Anthony a. Wood it has been stated that he was appointed by 
Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to be deputy-chamberlain in. 1570, 
and that he held this office for forty-five years. His patent of 
appointment, however, preserved in the Rolls Office, proves that 
he succeeded one Thomas Reve in the post on the nth of July 
1603. With his friends, Sir Robert Cotton and Camden, he was 
one of the original members of the Society of Antiquaries. He 
spent much labour in cataloguing the records and state papers, 
and made a special study of the Domesday Book, preparing an 
explanation of its more obscure terms. Thomas Hearne, in his 
Collection of Curious Discourses written by Eminent Antiquaries; 
(Oxford, 1720), includes six by Agarde on such subjects as the 
origin of parliament, the antiquity of shires, the authority and 
privileges of heralds, &c. Agarde died on the 22nd of August 
161 5 and was buried in the cloister of Westminster Abbey, on 
his tomb being inscribed "Recordorum regiorum hie prope 
depositorum diligens scrutator." He bequeathed to the exchequer 
all his papers relating to that court, and to his friend Sir Robert 
Cotton his other manuscripts, amounting to twenty volumes, 
most of which are now in the British Museum. 

AGAS, RADULPH, or Ralph (c. 1 540-1621), English land- 
surveyor, was born at Stoke-by-Nayland, Suffolk, about 1540, 
and entered upon the practice of his profession in 1566. Letters 
which he wrote to Lord Burghley, describing the methods of 
surveying, are extant, and a kind of advertising prospectus of 
his abilities, in which he describes himself as clever at arithmetic 
and "skilled in writing smaule, after the skantelinge & pro- 
portion of copiynge the Oulde & New Testamentes seven tymes 
in one skinne of partchmente without anie woorde abreviate 
or contracted, which maie also serve for drawinge discriptions 
of contries into volumes portable in verie little cases." He is 
best known for his maps of Oxford (1578), Cambridge (1592) 
and London. Copies of the first two are preserved in the Bodleian 
Library. Of the map of London and Westminster, which was 
probably prepared about 1591, two copies have been preserved, 
one by the Corporation of London and the other in the Pepysian 
collection at Magdalene College, Cambridge. The map is over 
six feet long, printed from wooden blocks, and gives a valuable 
picture of the London of Elizabeth's time. Agas died on the * 
26th of November 1621. 

AGASIAS. There were two Greek sculptors of this name. 
Agasias, son of Dositheus, has signed the remarkable statue 
called the Borghese Warrior, in the Louvre. Agasias, son of 
Menophilus, is the author of another striking figure of a v;airior 
in the museum of Athens. Both belonged to the school of 
Ephesus and flourished about 100 B.C. 

See E. A. Gardner, Handbook of Greek Sculpture, ii. p. 475. 

AGASSIZ, ALEXANDER EMANUEL (1835-1910), American 
man of science, son of J. L. R. Agassiz, was born in Neuchatel, 
Switzerland, on the 17th of December 1835. He came to the 



AGASSIZ 



367 



United States with his father in 1846; graduated at Harvard 
in 1855, subsequently studying engineering and chemistry, and 
taking the degree of bachelor of science at the Lawrence scien- 
tific school of the same institution in 1857; and in 1859 became 
an assistant in the United States Coast Survey. Thenceforward 
he became a specialist in marine ichthyology, but devoted much 
time to the investigation, superintendence and exploitation of 
mines, being superintendent of the Calumet and Hecla copper 
mines, Lake Superior, from 1866 to 1869, and afterwards, as a 
stockholder, acquiring a fortune, out of which he gave to 
Harvard, for the museum of comparative zoology and other 
purposes, some $500,000. In 1875 he surveyed Lake Titicaca, 
Peru, examined the copper mines of Peru and Chile, and made 
a collection of Peruvian antiquities for that museum, of which 
he was curator from 1874 to 1885. He assisted Sir Wyville 
Thomson in the examination and classification of the collections 
of the " Challenger " exploring expedition, and wrote the 
Review of the Echini (2 vols., 1872-1874) in the reports. Between 
1877 and 1880 he took part in the three dredging expeditions of 
the steamer " Blake," of the United States Coast Survey, and 
presented a full account of them in two volumes (1888). Of his' 
other writings on marine zoology, most are contained in the 
bulletins and memoirs of the museum of comparative zoology; 
but he published in 1865 (with Elizabeth Cary Agassiz, his step- 
mother) Seaside Studies in Natural History, a work at once exact 
and stimulating/ and in 1871 Marine Animals of Massachusetts 
Bay. 

AGASSIZ, JEAN LOUIS RODOLPHE (1807-1873), Swiss 
naturalist and geologist, was the son of the Protestant pastor 
of the parish of Motier, on the north-eastern shore of the Lake 
of Morat (Murten See), and not far from the eastern extremity 
of the Lake of Neuchatel. Agassiz was born at this retired place 
on the 28th of May 1807. Educated first at home, then spending 
four years at the gymnasium of Bienne, he completed his ele- 
mentary studies at the academy of Lausanne. Having adopted 
medicine as his profession, he studied successively at the uni- 
versities of Zurich, Heidelberg and Munich; and he availed 
himself of the advantages afforded by these universities for 
extending his knowledge of natural history, especially of botany. 
After completing his academical course, he took in 1829 his 
degree of doctor of philosophy at Erlangen, and in 1830 that of 
doctor of medicine at Munich. 

Up to this time he had paid no special attention to the study 
of ichthyology, which soon afterwards became the great occu- 
pation of his life. Agassiz always declared that he was led into 
ichthyological pursuits through the following circumstances:— 
In 1819-1820, J. B. Spix and C. F. P. von Martius were engaged in 
their celebrated Brazilian tour, and on their return to Europe, 
amongst other collections of natural objects they brought home 
an important set of the freshwater fishes of Brazil, and especially 
of the Amazon river. Spix, who died in 1826, did not live long 
enough to work out the history of these fishes; and Agassiz, 
though little more than a youth just liberated from his academic 
studies, was selected by Prof. Martius for this purpose. He at 
once threw himself into the work with that earnestness of spirit 
which characterized him to the end of his busy life, and the task 
of describing and figuring the Brazilian fishes was completed 
and published in 1829. This was followed by an elaborate re- 
search into the history of the fishes found in the Lake of Neuchatel. 
Enlarging his plans, he issued in 1830 a prospectus of a History 
of the Freshwater Fishes of Central Europe. It was only in 1839, 
however, that the first part of this publication appeared, and it 
was completed in 1842. In 1832 he was appointed professor 
of natural history in the university of Neuchatel. Having 
become a professed ichthyologist, it was impossible that the 
fossil fishes should fail to attract his attention. The rich stores 
furnished by the slates of Glarus and the limestones of Monte 
Bolca were already well known; but very little had been accom- 
plished in the way of scientific study of them. Agassiz, as early 
as 1829, with his wonted enthusiasm, planned the publication of 
the work which, more than any other, laid the foundation of his 
world-wide fame. Five volumes of his Recherches sur les poissons 



fossiles appeared at intervals from 1833 to 1843 [1844]. They 
were magnificently illustrated, chiefly through the labours of 
Joseph Dinkel, an artist of remarkable power in delineating 
natural objects. In gathering materials for this great work 
Agassiz visited the principal museums in Europe, and meeting 
Cuvier in Paris, he received much encouragement and assistance 
from him. 

Agassiz found that his palaeontological labours rendered 
necessary a new basis of ichthyological classification. The fossils 
rarely exhibited any traces of the soft tissues of fishes. They 
consisted chiefly of the teeth, scales and fins, even the bones 
being perfectly preserved in comparatively few instances. He 
therefore adopted his well-known classification, which divided 
fishes into four groups— viz. Ganoids, Placoidsj Cycloids and 
Ctenoids, based on the nature of the scales and other dermal 
appendages. While Agassiz did much to place the subject on, 
a scientific basis, his classification has not been found to meet 
the requirements of modern research. As remarked by Dr A. 
Smith ■ Woodward, he sought to interpret the past structures 
by too rigorous a comparison with those of living forms. (See 
Catalogue of Fossil Fishes in the British Natural History Museum.) 

As the important descriptive work of Agassiz proceeded, it 
became obvious that it would over-tax his resources, unless 
assistance could be afforded. The British Association came to 
his aid, and the earl of EUesrnere— then Lord Francis Egerton — 
gave him yet more efficient help. The original drawings made for 
the work, chiefly by Dinkel, amounted to 1 290 in number. These 
were purchased by the Earl, and presented by him to the Geo- 
logical Society of London. In 1836 the Wollaston medal was 
awarded by the council of that society to Agassiz for his work 
on fossil ichthyology; and in 1838 he was elected a foreign 
member of the Royal Society. Meanwhile the invertebrate 
animals engaged his attention. In 1837 he issued the "Pro- 
drome " of a monograph on the recent and fossil Echinodermata, 
the first part of which appeared in 1838; in 1839-1840 he 
published two quarto volumes on the fossil Echinoderms of 
Switzerland; and in 1840-1845 he issued his Etudes critiques sur 
les mollusques fossiles. 

Subsequently to his'first visit to England in 1834, the labours of 
Hugh Miller and other geologists brought to light the remarkable 
fishes of the Old Red Sandstone of the north-east of Scotland. 
The strange forms of the Pterichthys, the Coccosteus and other 
genera were then made known to geologists for the first time. 
They naturally were of intense interest to Agassiz, and formed the 
subject of a special monograph by him published in 1844-1845: 
Monographic des poissons fossiles du Vieux Gres Rouge, ou 
Systeme Dfroonien {Old Red Sandstone) des lies Britanniques et de 
Russie. 

The year 1836 witnessed the inauguration of a new investiga- 
tion, which proved to be of the utmost importance to geological 
science. Previously to this date de Saussure, Venetz, Char- 
pentier and others had made the glaciers of the Alps the subjects 
of special study, and Charpentier had even arrived at the 
conclusion that the erratic blocks of alpine rocks scattered over 
the slopes and summits of the Jura mountains had been conveyed 
thither by glaciers. The question having attracted the attention 
of Agassiz, he not only made successive journeys to the alpine 
regions in company with Charpentier, but he had a hut con- 
structed upon one of the Aar glaciers, which for a time he made 
his home, in order to investigate thoroughly the structure and 
movements of the ice. These labours resulted in the publication 
of his grand work in two volumes entitled Jitudes sur les glaciers, 
1840. Therein he discussed the movements of the glaciers, their 
moraines, their influence in grooving and rounding the rocks over 
which they travelled, and in producing the striations and roches 
moutonnies with which we are now so familiar. He not only 
accepted Charpen tier's idea that some of the alpine glaciers had 
extended across the wide plains and valleys drained by the Aar 
and the Rhone, and thus landed parts of their remains upon the 
uplands of the Jura, but he went still farther. He concluded that, 
at a period geologically recent, Switzerland had been another 
Greenland; that instead of a few glaciers stretching across th* 



3 68 



AGATE 



areas referred to, one vast sheet of ice, originating in the higher 
Alps, had extended over the entire valley of north-western 
Switzerland until it reached the southern slopes of the Jura, 
which, though they checked and deflected its further extension, 
did not prevent the ice from reaching in many places the 
summit of the range. The publication of this work gave a fresh 
impetus to the study of glacial phenomena in all parts of the 
world. 

Thus familiarized with the phenomena attendant on the move- 
ments of recent glaciers, Agassiz was prepared for a discovery 
which he made in 1840, in conjunction with William Buckland. 
These two savants visited the mountains of Scotland together, and 
found in different localities clear evidence of ancient glacial 
action. The discovery was announced to the Geological Society 
of London in successive communications from the two distin- 
guished observers. The mountainous districts of England and 
Wales and Ireland were also considered to constitute centres 
for the dispersion of glacial debris; and Agassiz remarked " that 
great sheets of ice, resembling those now existing in Greenland, 
once covered all the countries in which unstratified gravel 
(boulder drift) is found; that this gravel was in general pro- 
duced by the trituration of the sheets of ice upon the subjacent 
surface, &c." 

In 1 84 2- 1 846 he issued his Nomenclator Zoologicus, a classified 
list, with references, of all names employed in zoology for genera 
and groups — a work of great labour and research. With the 
aid of a grant of money from the king of Prussia, Agassiz, 
in the autumn of 1846, crossed the Atlantic, with the twofold 
design of investigating the natural history and geology of the 
United States and delivering a course of lectures on zoology, by 
invitation from J. A. Lowell, at the Lowell Institute at Boston; 
the tempting advantages, pecuniary and scientific, presented to 
him in the New World induced him to settle in the United 
States, where he remained to the end of his life. He was ap- 
pointed professor of zoology and geology in Harvard University, 
Cambridge, U.S., in 1847. In 1852 he accepted a medical pro- 
fessorship of comparative anatomy at Charlestown, but this he 
resigned in two years. 

The transfer to a new field and the association w'th fresh objects 
of interest gave his energies an increased stimulus. Volume 
after volume now proceeded from his pen: some of his writings 
were popular, but most of them dealt with the higher departments 
of scientific research. His work on Lake Superior, and his four 
volumes of Contributions to the Natural History of the United 
Stales, 1857-1862, were of this latter character. We must hot 
overlook the valuable service he rendered to science by the 
formation, for his own use, of a catalogue of scientific memoirs — 
an extraordinary work for a man whose hands were already so 
full. This catalogue, edited and materially enlarged by the late 
Hugh E. Strickland, wis published by the Ray Society under the 
title of Bibliographia Zoologiae et Geologiae, in 4 vols., 1848-1854. 
Nor must we forget that he was building up another magnificent 
monument of his industry in the Museum of Natural History, 
which rose under his fostering care, at Cambridge. But at length 
the great strain on his physical powers began to tell. His early 
labours among the fishes of Brazil had often caused him to cast 
a longing glance towards that country, and he now resolved to 
combine the pursuit of health with the gratification of his long- 
cherished desires. In April 1865 he started for Brazil, with 
his wife and class of qualified assistants. An interesting account 
of this expedition, entitled A Journey in Brazil (1868), was 
published by Mrs Agassiz and himself after they returned home 
in August 1866. 

In 187 1 he made a second excursion, visiting the southern 
shores of the North American continent, both on its Atlantic 
and its Pacific sea-boards. He had for many years yearned after 
the establishment of a permanent school where zoological science 
could be pursued amidst the haunts of the living , subjects of 
study. The last, and possibly the most influential, of the labours 
of his life was the establishment of such an institution, which 
he was enabled to effect through the liberality of Mr John 
Anderson, a citizen of New York. That gentleman, in 1873, not 



only handed over to Agassiz the island of Penikese, in Buzzard's 
Bay, on the east coast, but also presented him with $50,000 
wherewith permanently to endow it as a practical school of 
natural science, especially devoted to the study of marine 
zoology. Unfortunately he did not long survive the establish- 
ment of this institution. The disease with which he had struggled 
for some years proved fatal on the 14th of December 1873. 
He was buried at Mount Auburn. His monument is a boulder 
selected from the moraine of the glacier of the Aar near the site 
of the old H6tel des Neuchatelois, not far from the spot where 
his hut once stood; and the pine-trees which shelter his grave 
were sent from his old home in Switzerland. His extensive 
knowledge of natural history makes it somewhat remarkable 
to find that from first to last he steadily rejected the doctrine 
of evolution, and affirmed his belief in independent creations. 
When studying the superficial deposits of the Brazilian plains in 
1865, his vivid imagination covered even that wide tropical area, 
as it had covered Switzerland before, with one vast glacier, 
extending from the Andes to the sea. This view, however, 
has not been generally accepted. His daring conceptions were 
only equalled by the unwearied industry and genuine en- 
thusiasm with which he worked them out; and if in details 
his labours were somewhat defective, it was only because he 
had ventured to attempt what was too much for any one man 
to accomplish. 

It may be interesting to mention that the charming verses 
written by Longfellow on " The fiftieth birthday of Agassiz " 
were read by the author at a dinner given to Agassiz by the 
Saturday Club in Cambridge, Mass., in 1857. 

Louis Agassiz was twice married, and by his first wife he had 
an only son, Alexander Agassiz (q.v.), born in 1835; in 1850, 
after her death, he married his second wife, Elizabeth Cabot 
Gary of Boston, Mass., afterwards well known as a writer and 
as an active promoter of educational work in connexion with 
Radcliffe College (see an article on Radcliffe College, by Helen 
Leah Reed in the New England Magazine for January 1895). 

Authorities. — L.Agassiz,His Life and Correspondence ,'2vols., by 
E.C (Mrs)Agassiz (London, 1885) ; Louis Agassiz, His Life and Work, 
by C. F. Holder (New York and London, 1893). (H. B. Wo.) 

AGATE, a term applied not to a distinct mineral species, but 
to an aggregate of various forms of silica, chiefly Chalcedony 
(q.v.). According to Theophrastus the agate (dxarijs) was 
named from the river Achates, now the Drillo, in Sicily, where 
the stone was originally found. Most agates occur as nodules 
in erupcive rocks, or ancient lavas, where they represent cavities 
originally produced by the disengagement of vapour in the 
molten mass, and since filled, wholly or partially, by siliceous 
matter deposited in regular layers upon the walls. Such agates, 
when cut transversely, exhibit a succession of parallel lines, 
often of extreme tenuity, giving a banded appearance to the 
section, whence such stones are known as banded agate, riband 
agate and striped agate. Certain agates also occur, to a limited 
extent, in veins, of which a notable example is the beautiful 
brecciated agate of Schlottwitz, near Wesenstein in Saxony — 
a stone mostly composed of angular fragments of agate cemented 
with amethystine quartz. 

In the formation of an ordinary agate, it is probable that 
waters containing silica in solution — derived, perhaps, from the 
decomposition of some of the silicates in the lava itself — per- 
colated through the rock, and deposited a siliceous coating on 
the interior of the vapour-vesicles. Variations in the character 
of the solution, or in the conditions of deposit, may have caused 
corresponding variation in the successive layers, so that bands 
of chalcedony often alternate with layers of crystalline quartz, 
and occasionally of opaline silica. By movement of the lava, 
when originally viscous, the vesicles were in many cases drawn 
out and compressed, whence the mineral matter with which 
they became filled assumed an elongated form, having the longer 
axis in the direction in which the magma flowed. From the fact 
that these kernels are more or less almond-shaped they are called 
amygdales, whilst the rock which encloses them is known as 
an amygdaloid. ^Several vapour-vesicles may unite while the 



AGATE 



369 



rock is viscous, and thus form a large cavity which may become 
the home of an agate of exceptional size; thus a Brazilian geode, 
lined with amethyst, of the weight of 35 tons, was exhibited 
at the Dusseldorf Exhibition of 1902. 

The first deposit on the wall of a cavity, forming the " skin " 
of the agate, is generally a dark greenish mineral substance, 
like celadonite, delessite or " green earth," which are hydrous 
silicates rich in iron, derived probably from the decomposition 
of the augite in the mother-rock. ' This green silicate may give 
rise by alteration to a brown oxide of iron (limonite), producing 
a rusty appearance on the outside of the agate-nodule. The 
outer surface of an agate, freed from its matrix,' is often pitted 
and rough, apparently in consequence of the removal of the 
original coating. The first layer spread over the wall of the 
cavity has been called the " priming," and upon this basis 
zeolitic minerals may be deposited, as was pointed out by Dr 
M. F. Heddle. Chalcedony is generally one of the earlier deposits 
and crystallized quartz one of later formation. Tubular channels, 
usually choked with siliceous deposits, are often visible in 
sections of agate, and were formerly regarded, especially by 
L. von Buch and J. Noggerath, as inlets of infiltration, by which 
the siliceous solutions gained access to the interior of the amyg- 
daloidal cavity. It seems likely, however, that the solution 
transuded through the walls generally, penetrating the chalce- 
donic layers, as Heddle maintained, by osmotic action. Much of 
the chalcedony in an agate is known, from the method of arti- 
ficially staining the stone, to be readily permeable. It was 
argued by E. Reusch that the cavities were alternately filled 
and emptied by means of intermittent hot springs carrying 
silica; while G. Lange, of Idar, suggested that the tension of 
the confined steam might pierce an outlet through some weak 
point in the coating of gelatinous silica, deposited on the walls, 
so that the tubes would be channels of egress rather than of 
ingress — a view supported by Heddle, who described them as 
" tubes of escape." 

It sometimes happens that horizontal deposits, or strata 
usually opaline in character, are formed on the floor of a cavity 
after the walls have been lined with successive layers of chalce- 
dony. Many agates are hollow, since deposition has not pro- 
ceeded far enough to fill the cavity, and in such cases the last 
deposit commonly consists of quartz, often amethystine, having 
the apices of the crystals directed towards the free space, so as 
to form a crystal-lined cavity or geode. 

When the deposits in an agate have been formed on a crop 
of crystals, or on a rugose base, the cross-section presents a 
zigzag pattern, rather like the plan of a fortress with salient 
and retiring angles, whence the stone is termed fortification 
agate. If the section shows concentric circles, due either to 
stalactitic growth or to deposition in the form of. bosses and beads 
on the floor, the stone is known as ring agate or eye agate. A 
Mexican agate, showing only a single eye, has received the name 
of " cyclops." Included matter of a green colour, like fragments 
of " green earth," embedded in the chalcedony and disposed 
in filaments and other forms suggestive of vegetable growth, 
gives rise to moss agate. These inorganic enclosures in the agate 
have been sometimes described, even after microscopic examina- 
tion, as true vegetable structures. Dendritic markings of black 
or brown colour, due to infiltration of oxides of manganese and 
iron, produce the variety of agate known as Mocha stone. Agates 
of exceptional beauty often pass in trade under the name of 
Oriental agate. Certain stones, when examined in thin sections 
by transmitted light, show a diffraction spectrum, due to 
ths extreme delicacy of the successive bands, whence they are 
termed rainbow agates. 

On the disintegration of the matrix in which the agates are 
embedded, they are set free, and, being by their siliceous nature 
extremely resistant to the action of air and water, remain as 
n«J«les in the soil and gravel, or become rolled as pebbles in 
the streams. Such is the origin of the " Scotch pebbles," used 
as ornamental stones. They are agates derived from the andesitic 
Jlavas of Old Red Sandstone age, chiefly in the Ochils and the 
SUdkws. In like manner, the South American agates, so largely 



cut and polished at the present time, are found mostly as boulders 
in the beds of rivers. 

An enormous trade in agate- working is carried on in a small 
district in Germany, around Oberstein on the Nahe, a tributary 
of the Rhine at Bingen. Here the industry was located many 
centuries ago, in consequence of the abundant occurrence of 
agates in the amygdaloidal melaphyre of the district, notably 
in the Galgenberg, or Steinkaulenberg, overlooking the village 
of Idar, on the Idar Bach, about two miles from Oberstein. 
The abundant water-power in the neighbourhood had also a 
share in the determination of the industrial site. At the present 
time, however, steam power and even electricity are employed 
in the mills of the Oberstein district. Although the agate- 
industry is still carried on there, especially at Idar, the stones 
operated on are not of indigenous origin, but are imported mostly 
from Brazil (Rio Grande do Sul) and from Uruguay, where they 
were discovered in 1827. Agate- working is also carried on to 
a limited extent at Waldkirch in the Black Forest. 

Most commercial agate is artificially stained, so that stones 
naturally unattractive by their dull grey tints come to be valuable 
for ornamental purposes. The art of staining the stone is believed 
to be very ancient. Possibly referred to by Pliny (bk. xxxvii. 
cap. 75), it was certainly practised at an early date by the Italian 
cameo-workers, and from Italy a knowledge of the art — long 
kept secret and practised traditionally — passed in the early 
part of the 19th century to the agate- workers in Germany, 
by whom it has since been greatly developed. The colouring 
matter is absorbed by the porosity of the stone, but different 
stones and even different layers in the same stone exhibit great 
variation in absorptive power. The Brazilian agates lend them- 
selves readily to coloration, while the German agates are much 
less receptive. 

To produce a dark brown or black colour, the stone is kept 
perhaps for two or three weeks in a saccharine solution, or in 
olive oil, at a moderate temperature. After removal from this 
medium, the agate is well washed and then digested for a short 
time in sulphuric acid, which entering the pores chars or carbonizes 
the absorbed sugar or oil. Certain layers of chalcedony are 
practically impermeable, and these consequently remain un- 
coloured, so that an alternation of dark and white bands is 
obtained, thus giving rise to an onyx. If stained too dark, the 
colour may be " drawn," or lightened, by the action of nitric 
acid. 

Agate is stained red, so as to form carnelian and sardonyx, 
by means of ferric oxide. This may be derived from any iron 
compound naturally present in the stone, especially from limonite 
by dehydration on baking. Some stones are " burnt " by mere 
exposure to the heat of the sun, whereby the brown colour 
passes to red. Usually, however, an iron-salt, like ferrous 
sulphate, is artificially introduced in solution and then decom- 
posed by heat, so as to form in the pores a rich red pigment. 

A blue colour, supposed to render the agate rather like lapis 
lazuli, is produced by using first an iron salt and then a solution 
of ferrocyanide or ferricyauide of potassium; a green colour, 
like that of chrysoprase, is obtained by means of salts of nickel 
or of chromium; and a yellow tint is developed by the action 
of hydrochloric acid. 

Among the uses to which agate is applied may be mentioned 
the formation of knife-edges of delicate balances, small mortars 
and pestles for chemical work, burnishers and writing styles, 
umbrella-handles, paper-knives, seals, brooches and other 
trivial ornaments. Most of these are cut and polished in the 
Oberstein district, at a very cheap rate, from South American 
stones. 

Numerous localities in the United States and Canada yield 
agates, as described by Dr G. F. Kunz. They are abundant 
in the trap rocks of the Lake Superior region, some of the finest 
coming from Michipicoten Island, Ontario. A locality on the 
shore of the lake is called Agate Bay. Wood agate, or agatized 
wood, is not infrequently found in Colorado, California and 
elsewhere in the West, the most notable locality being the famous 
" silicified forest " known as Chalcedony Park, in Apache county, 



37° 



AGATHA-^AGATHOCLES 



Arizona. Here there are vast numbers of water-rolled logs of 
silicified wood, in rocks of Triassic age, but only a small quantity 
of the wood is fine enough for ornamental purposes. The cellular 
tissue of the vegetable matter is filled, or even replaced, by 
various siliceous minerals like chalcedony, jasper, crystalline 
quartz and semi-opal, the silica having probably been introduced 
by thermal waters. Some of the agate shows the microscopic 
structure of araucarian wood. The agatized wood is sometimes 
known by the Indian name of shinarump. 

In India agates occur abundantly in the amygdaloidal varieties 
of the Deccan and Rajmaha.1 traps, and as pebbles in the detritus 
derived from these rocks. Some of the finest are found in the 
agate-gravels near Ratanpur, in Rajpipla. The trade in agates 
has been carried on from early times at Cambay, where the stones 
are cut and polished. Agates are also worked at Jubbulpore. 

In many parts of New South Wales, agates, resulting from 
the disintegration of trap rocks, are common in the river-beds 
and old drifts. They occur also in Queensland, as at Agate Creek, 
running into the Gilbert river. South Africa likewise yields 
numerous agates, especially in the gravels of the Orange and 
Vaal rivers. 

It should be noted that in England agates are found not only 
in old lavas, like the andesites of the Cheviots, but also to a 
limited extent in the Dolomitic Conglomerate, an old beach- 
deposit of Triassic age in the Mendips and the neighbourhood 
of Bristol. They are also found as weathered pebbles in the 
drift of Lichfield in Staffordshire. 

For Scottish agates see M. F. Heddle, " On the Structure of 
Agates," Trans. Geolog. Soc. Glasgow, vol. xi. part ii., 1900, p. 153; 
and Mineralogy of Scotland (1901), vol. i. p. 58; J. G. Good- 
child, Proc. Phys. Soc. Edinburgh, vol. xiv., 1899, p. 191. For the 
agate-industry see G. Lange, Die Halbedelsteine (Kreuznach, 1868). 
For American agates, G. F. . Kunz, Gems and Precious Stones 
of North America (1890), p. 128. For agates in general see 
Max Bauer's Precious Stones, translated by L. J. Spencer (London, 
1904). (F. W. R.*) 

AGATHA, SAINT, the patron saint of Catania, Sicily, where 
her festival is celebrated on the 5 th of February. The legend 
is that she was a native of Sicily (probably of Catania, though 
Palermo also claims her), of noble birth and great beauty. She 
repelled the advances of the Roman prefect sent by the emperor 
Decius to govern Sicily, and was by his orders brutally tortured 
and finally sent to the stake. As soon as the fire was lighted, 
an earthquake occurred, and the people insisted on her release. 
She died in prison on the 5th of February 251. The rescue of 
Catania from fire during an eruption of Mount Etna was later 
attributed to St Agatha's veil. 

AGATHANGELUS, Agathange or Akathankelos, Armenian 
historian, lived during the 4th century, and wrote a History 
of the Reign of Dertad, or Tiridates, and of the Preaching of 
St Gregory the Illuminator. The text of this history has been 
considerably altered, but it has always been in high favour with 
the Armenians. It has been translated into several languages, 
and Greek and Latin translations are found in the Acta Sanctorum 
Bollandistarum, tome viii. As known to us the history consists of 
three parts, a history of St Gregory and his companions, the doc- 
trine of Gregory, and the conversion of Armenia to Christianity. 

See V. Langlois, Collection des historiens anciens et modernes de 
VArmenie (Paris, 1868). 

AGATHARCHIDES, or Agatharchus, of Cnidus, Greek his- 
torian and geographer, lived in the time of Ptolemy Philometor 
(181-146 B.C.) and his successors. Amongst other works,, he 
wrote treatises on Asia, Europe and The Red Sea. Interesting 
extracts from the last, of some length, are preserved in Photius 
(cod. 213), who praises the style of the author, which was 
modelled on that of Thucydides. 

See H. Leopoldi, De Agatharchide Cnidio Dissertatio (1892) ; C. W. 
Miiller, Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum, iii., and Geographi Graeci 
Minores, i. ; E. H. Bunbury, Hist, of Ancient Geography, ii. (1879). 

AGATHARCHUS, an Athenian painter of the 5th century B.C. 
He is said by Vitruvius to have been the first to paint a scene for 
the acting of tragedies. Hence some writers, such as Karl 
Woermann, have supposed that he introduced perspective and 
illusion into painting. This is a mistaken view, for ancient 



writers know nothing of canvas scenes; the background painted 
by Agatharchus was the wooden front of the stage building, and 
it was painted, not with reference to any particular play, but as 
a permanent decorative background, representing no doubt a 
palace or temple. Agatharchus is said to have been seized by 
Alcibiades and compelled by him to paint the interior of his 
house, which shows that at the time (about 435 B.C.) decorative 
painting of rooms was the fashion. 

AGATHIAS (c. a.d. 536-582), of Myrina in Aeolis, Greek poet 
and historian. He studied law at Alexandria, completed his 
training at Constantinople and practised as an advocate (scholas- 
ticus) in the courts. Literature, however, was his favourite 
pursuit. He wrote a number of short love-poems in epic metre, 
tailed Daphniaca. He next put together a kind of anthology, 
containing epigrams by earlier and contemporary poets and him- 
self, under the title of a Cycle of New Epigrams. About a hundred 
epigrams by Agathias have been preserved in the Greek Antho- 
logy and show considerable taste and elegance. After the death 
of Justinian (565), some of Agathias's friends persuaded him to 
write the history of his own times. This work, in five books, 
begins where Procopius ends,. and is the chief authority for the 
period 552-558. It deals chiefly with the struggles of the Byzan- 
tine army, under the command of the eunuch Narses, against 
the Goths, Vandals; Franks and Persians. The author prides 
himself on his honesty and impartiality, but he is lacking in 
judgment and knowledge of facts; the work, however, is valuable 
from the importance of the events of which it treats. Gibbon 
contrasts Agathias as " a poet and rhetorician "with Procopius 
" a statesman and soldier." 

Authorities. — Editio princeps, by B. Vulcanius (1594); in the 
Bonn Corpus Scriptorum Byz. Hist., by B. G. Niebuhr (1828) ; in 
Migne, Patrologia Graeca, lxxxviii. ; L. Dindorf, Historici Graeci 
Minores (1871); W. S. Teuffel, " Agathias von Myrine," in Philo- 
logus (i. 1846); C. Krumbacher, Geschichte der byzantinischen 
Littefatur (2nd ed. 1897). 

AGATHO, pope from 678 to 681, was born in Sicily. He is 
noteworthy as the pope who ordered St Wilfrid to be restored to 
his bishopric at York in 679, and as the first to cease payment 
of the tribute hitherto paid on election to the emperor at Con- 
stantinople. It was during his pontificate that the 6th oecumenical 
council was held at Constantinople, to which he sent his legates 
and those from a Roman council held in 679. Agatho died on 
the 10th of January 681. 

AGATHOCLES (361-289 B.C.), tyrant of Syracuse, was born at 
Thermae Himeraeae (mod. Termini Imerese) in Sicily. The son 
of a potter who had removed to Syracuse, he learned his father's 
trade, but afterwards entered the army. In 333 he married the 
widow of his patron Damas, a distinguished and wealthy citizen. 
He was twice banished for attempting to overthrow the oligar- 
chical party in Syracuse (q.v.); in 317 he returned with an army 
of mercenaries under a solemn oath to observe the democratic 
constitution which was then set up. Having banished or 
murdered some 10,000 citizens, and thus made himself master 
of Syracuse, he created a strong army and fleet and subdued the 
greater part of Sicily. War with Carthage followed. In 310 
Agathocles, defeated and besieged in Syracuse, took the desperate 
resolve of breaking through the blockade and attacking the 
enemy in Africa. After several victories he was at last completely 
defeated (306) and fled secretly to Sicily. After concluding peace 
with Carthage, Agathocles styled himself king of Sicily, and 
established his rule over the Greek cities of the island more firmly 
than ever. Even in his old age he displayed the same restless 
energy, and is said to have been meditating a fresh attack on 
Carthage at the time of his death. His last years were harassed 
by ill-health and the turbulence of his grandson Archagathus, at 
whose instigation he is said to have been poisoned; according to 
others, he died a natural death. He was a born leader of mercen- 
aries, and, although he did not shrink from cruelty to gain his 
ends, he afterwards showed himself a mild and popular "tyrant." 

See Justin xxii., xxiii. ; Diodorus Siculus xix., xxi., xxii. (follows 

feherally Timaeus who had a special grudge against Agathocles) ; 
'olybius ix. 23 ; Schubert, Geschichte des Agathokles (1887); Grote, 
History of Greece, ch. 97; also Sicily, History. 



AGATHODAEMON— AGDE 



37 1 



AGATHODAEMON, in Greek mythology, the " good spirit " 
of cornfields and vineyards. It was the custom of the Greeks to 
drink a cup of pure wine in his honour at the end of each meal 
(Aristophanes, Equites,io6). He was also regarded as the protect- 
ing spirit of the state and of individuals. He was often accom- 
panied by 'AyaOy Tvxv (good fortune), and in this aspect may be 
compared' with the Roman Bonus Eventus (Pliny, Nat Hist. 
xxxvi. 23), and Genius. He is represented in works of art in the 
form of a serpent, or of a young man with a cornucopia and a 
bowl in one hand, and a poppy and ears of corn in the other. 

See Gerhard, Uber Agathodamon und Bona Dea (Berlin, 1849). 

AGATHODAEMON, of Alexandria, map designer, probably 
lived in the 2nd century a.d. Some MSS. of the Geography of 
Ptolemy contain twenty-seven maps, which are stated to have 
been drawn by Agathodaemon of Alexandria, who " delineated 
the whole world according to the eight books of Ptolemy's 
geography." As Ptolemy speaks of Ulvaxei to accompany his 
treatise, these maps were probably the work of a contemporary 
acting under his instructions. About 1470 Nicolaus Doris, a 
Benedictine monk, brought out a revised edition of them, the 
names being inserted in Latin instead of Greek. 

See Bunbury, History of Ancient Geography, ii. 

AGATHON (c. 448-400 B.C.), Athenian tragic poet, friend of 
Euripides and Plato, best known from his mention by Aristo- 
phanes (Thesmophoriazusae) and in Plato's Symposium, which 
describes the banquet given to celebrate his obtaining a prize for 
a tragedy (416). He probably died at the court of Archelaus, 
king of Macedonia. He introduced certain innovations, and 
Aristotle (Poetica, 9) tells us that the plot of his "Avdos was 
original, not, as usually, borrowed from mythological subjects. 

See Aristophanes, Thesmoph. 59, 106, Eccles. 100; Plato, Symp. 
198 c; Plutarch, Symp. 3; Aelian, Var. Hist. xiv. 13; Ritsch, 
Opuscula, i. ; fragments in Nauck, Tragicorum Graecorum Fragmenta. 

AGATHYRSI, a peopie of Thracian origin, who in the earliest 
historical times occupied the plain of the Maris (Maros), in the 
region now known as Transylvania. Thyrsi is supposed to be a 
Scythian form of Tpavo-ol (Trausi), a Thracian tribe mentioned 
by Stephanus of Byzantium. They are described by Herodotus 
(iv. 104) as of luxurious habits, wearing gold ornaments (the 
district is still auriferous) and having wives in common. They 
tattooed their bodies (picti, Aeneid iv. 136), degrees of rank 
being indicated by the manner in which this was done, and 
coloured their hair dark blue. Like the Gallic Druids, they 
recited their laws in a kind of sing-song to prevent their being 
forgotten, a practice still in existence in the days of Aristotle 
{Problemata, xix. 28). Valerius Flaccus (Argonautica, vi. 135) 
calls them Thyrsagetae, probably in reference to their cele- 
bration of orgiastic rites in honour of some divinity akin to the 
Thracian Dionysus. In later times the Agathyrsi were driven 
farther north, and their name was unknown to the Romans in 
their original home. 

See Ammianus Marcellinus xxxi. 2. 17; Pliny, Nat. Hist. iv. 1.2 
[26]. 88; Pomponius Mela ii. 1. 10; W. Tomaschek, " Die alten 
Thraker," in Sitzungsber. der philosophisch-historischen Klasse der 
kaiserl. Akad. der Wiss. cxxviii. (Vienna, 1893). 

AGAVE, a large botanical genus of the natural order Amarylli- 
daceae, chiefly Mexican, but occurring also in the southern and 
western United States and in central and tropical South America. 
The plants have a large rosette of thick fleshy leaves generally 
ending in a sharp point and with a spiny margin; the stout stem 
is usually short, the leaves apparently springing from the root. 
They grow slowly and flower but once after a number of years, 
when a tall stem or " mast " grows from the centre of the leaf- 
rosette and bears a large number of shortly tubular flowers. 
After development of fruit the plant dies down, but suckers are 
frequently produced from the base of the stem which become 
new plants. The most familiar species is Agave americana (see 
fig.), a native of tropical America, the so-called century plant 
or American aloe (the maguey of Mexico). The number of years 
before flowering occurs depends on the vigour of the individual, 
the richness of the soil and the climate; during these years the 
plant is storing in its fleshy leaves the nourishment required for 
the effort of flowering. During the development of the inflor- 



escence there is a rush of sap to the base of the young flower- 
stalk. In the case of A. americana and other species this is used 
by the Mexicans to make their national beverage, pulque; the 
flower shoot is cut out and the sap collected and subsequently 
fermented. By distillation a spirit called mescal is prepared. 
The leaves of several species yield fibre, as for instance, A . rigida 
var. sisalana, sisal hemp (q.v.), A. decipiens, false sisal hemp; 
A. americana is the source of pita fibre, and is used as a fibre 
plant in Mexico, the West Indies and southern Europe. The 
flowering stem of the last named, dried and cut in slices, forms 




Agave americana, Century plant or American aloe. About /„ nat. 
size. I, Flower; 2, same flower split open above the ovary; 3, ovary 
cut across; 1, 2, and 3, about J nat. size. 

From the Botanical Magazine, by permission of Lovell Reeve and Co. 

natural razor strops, and the expressed juice of the leaves will 
lather in water like soap. In the Madras Presidency the plant 
is extensively used for hedges along railroads. Agave americana, 
century plant, was introduced into Europe about the middle of 
the 1 6th century and is now widely cultivated for its handsome 
appearance; in the variegated forms the leaf has a white or 
yellow marginal or central stripe from base to apex. As the 
leaves unfold from the centre of the rosette the impression of the 
marginal spines is Very conspicuous on the still erect younger 
leaves. The plants are usually grown in tubs and put out in 
the summer months, but in the winter require to be protected 
from frost. They mature very slowly and die after flowering, 
but are easily propagated by the offsets from the base of the 
stem. 

AGDE, a town of southern France, in the department of 
Herault, on the left bank of the river of that name, 25 m. from 
the Mediterranean Sea and 32 m. S.W. of Montpellier on the 
Southern railway. Pop. (1906) 7146. The town lies at the foot 
of an extinct volcano, the Montagne St Loup, and is built of 
black volcanic basalt, which gives it a gloomy appearance. 
Overlooking the river is the church of St Andre, which dates 
partly from the 12th century, and, till the Revolution, was a 
cathedral. It is a plain and massive structure with crenelated 
walls, and has the aspect of a fortress rather than of a church. 
The exterior is diversified by arched recesses forming machicola- 
tions, and the same architectural -feature is reproduced in the 
square tower which rises like a donjon above the building. 
The Canal du Midi, or Languedoc canal, uniting the Garonne 
with the Mediterranean, passes under the walls of the town, 



372 



AGE 



and the mouth of the Herault forms a harbour which is protected 
by a fort. The maritime commerce of the town has declined, 
owing partly to the neighbourhood of Cette, partly to the shallow- 
ness of the Herault. The fishing industry is, however, still 
active. The chief public institutions are the tribunal of 
commerce and the communal college. 

Agde is a place of great antiquity and is said to have been 
founded under the name of a/yadfi xoXis (Good City) by the 
Phocaeans. The bishopric was established about the year 400 
and was suppressed in 1 790. 

Synod of Agde (Concilium Agathense). — With the permission 
of the West Goth Alaric II. thirty-five bishops of southern Gaul 
assembled in person or sent deputies to Agde on the nth of 
September 506. Caesarius, bishop of Aries, presided. The 
forty-seven genuine canons of the synod deal with discipline, 
church life, the alienation of ecclesiastical property and the 
treatment of Jews. While favouring sacerdotal celibacy the 
council laid rather rigid restrictions on monasticism. It com- 
manded that the laity communicate at Christmas, Easter and 
Whitsuntide. The canons of Agde are based in part on earlier 
Gallic, African and Spanish legislation; and some of them were 
re-enacted by later councils, and found their way into collections 
such as the Hispana,! Pseudo-Isidore and Gratian-. 

See Mansi viii. 319 ff. ; Hefele, Conciliengeschichte, 2nd edition, 
ii. 649 ff. (English translation, iv. 76 ff.) ; Herzog-Hauck, Real- 
encyklopadie, i. 243. 

AGE (Fr. dge, through late Lat. aelalicum, from aetas), a term 
used (1) of the divisions into which it is suggested that human 
history may be divided, whether regarded from the geological, 
cultural or moral aspects, e.g. the palaeolithic age, the bronze 
age, the dark ages; (2) of an historic epoch or generation; (3) of 
any period or stage in the physical life of a person, animal or 
thing; (4) of that time of life at which the law attributes full 
responsibility for his or her acts to the individual. 

(1) From the earliest times there would appear to have been the 
belief that the history of the earth and of mankind falls naturally 
into periods or ages. Classical mythology popularized the idea. 
Hesiod, for example, in his poem Works and Days, describes 
minutely five successive ages, during each of which the earth was 
peopled by an entirely distinct race. The first or golden race 
lived in perfect happiness on the fruits of the untilled eaiih, 
suffered from no bodily infirmity, passed away in a gentle sleep, 
and became after death guardian daemons of this world. The 
second or silver race was degenerate, and refusing to worship the 
immortal gods, was buried by Jove in the earth. The third or 
brazen race, still more degraded, was warlike and cruel, and 
perished at last by internal violence. The fourth or heroic race 
was a marked advance upon the preceding, its members being the 
heroes or demi-gods who fought at Troy and Thebes, and who 
were rewarded after death by being permitted to reap thrice a 
year the free produce of the earth. The fifth or iron race, to 
which the poet supposes himself to belong, is the most degenerate 
of all, sunk so low in every vice that any new change must be for 
the better. Ovid, in his Metamorphoses, follows Hesiod exactly 
as to nomenclature and very closely as to substance. He makes 
the degeneracy continuous, however, by omitting the heroic race 
or age, which, as Grote points out, was probably introduced by 
Hesiod, not as part of his didactic plan, but from a desire to 
conciliate popular feeling by including in his poem the chief myths 
that were already current among the Greeks. Varro recognized 
three ages: (1) from the beginning of mankind to the Deluge, a 
quite indefinite period; (2) from the Deluge to the First Olym- 
piad, called the Mythical Period; (3) from the First Olympiad to 
his own time, called the Historic Period. Lucretius divided man's 
history into three cultural periods: (1) the Age of Stone; (2) the 
Age of Bronze; (3) the Age of Iron. He thus anticipated the 
conclusions of some of the greatest of modern archaeologists. 

(?) A definite period in history, distinguished by some special 
characteristic, such as great literary activity, is generally styled, 
with some appropriate epithet, an age. It is usual, for example, 
to speak of the Age of Pericles, the Augustan, the Elizabethan or 
the Victorian Ages; of the Age of the Crusades, the Dark Ages, 



the Middle Ages, the Age of Steam. Such isolated periods, with 
no continuity or necessary connexion of any kind, are obyiously 
quite distinct from the ages or organically related periods into 
which philosophers have divided the whole course of human 
history. Auguste Comte, for instance, distinguishes three ages 
according to the state of knowledge in each, and he supposes that 
we are now entering upon the third of these. In the first age of 
his scheme knowledge is supernatural or fictitious; in the second 
it is metaphysical or abstract; in the third it is positive or 
scientific. Schemes somewhat similar have been proposed by 
other philosophers, chiefly of France and Germany, and seem to 
be regarded by them as essential to any complete science of 
history. 

(3) The subject of the duration of human and animal life does 
not fall within the scope of this article, and the reader is referred 
to Longevity. But the word " age " has been used by physio- 
logists to express certain natural divisions in human development 
and decay. These are usually regarded as numbering five, viz. 
infancy, lasting to the seventh year; childhood to the fourteenth; 
youth to the twenty-first; adult life till fifty; and old age. 

(4) The division of human life into periods for legal purposes is 
naturally more sharp and definite than in physiology. It would 
be unscientific in the physiologist to name any precise year for 
the transition from one of his stages to another, inasmuch as that 
differs very considerably among different nations, and even to 
some extent among different individuals of the same nation. But 
the law must necessarily be fixed and uniform, and even where it 
professes to proceed according to nature, must be more precise 
than nature. The Roman law divided human life for its purposes 
into four chief periods, which had their subdivisions — (1) in- 
fantia, lasting till the close of the seventh year; (2) the period 
between infantia and pubertas, males becoming puberes at four- 
teen and females at twelve; (3) adolescentia, the period between 
puberty and majority; and (4) the period after the twenty-fifth 
year, when males became majores. The first period was one of 
total legal incapacity; in the second period a person could 
lawfully do certain specified acts, but only with the sanction of 
his tutor or guardian; in the third the restrictions were fewer, 
males being permitted to manage their own property, contract 
marriage and make a will; but majority was not reached until 
the age of twenty-five. By English law there are two great 
periods into which life is divided — infancy, which lasts in both 
sexes until the twenty-first year, and manhood or womanhood The 
period of infancy, again, is divided into several stages, marked by 
the growing development both of rights and obligations. Thus 
at twelve years of age a male may take the oath of allegiance ; at 
fourteen both sexes are held to have arrived at years of discretion, 
and may therefore choose guardians, give evidence and consent 
or disagree to a marriage. A female has the last privilege from 
the twelfth year, but the marriage cannot be celebrated until the 
majority of the parties without the consent of parents or 
guardians. At fourteen, too, both sexes are fully responsible to 
the criminal law. Between seven and fourteen there is responsi- 
bility only if the accused be proved doli capax, capable of discern- 
ing between right and wrong, the principle in that case being that 
malitia supplet aetatem. At twenty-one both males and females 
obtain their full legal rights, and become liable to all legal 
obligations. A seat in the British parliament may be taken at 
twenty-one. Certain professions, however, demand as a qualifi- 
cation in entrants a more advanced age than that of legal man- 
hood. In the Church of England a candidate for deacon's orders 
must be twenty-three (in the Roman Catholic Church, twenty- 
two) and for priest's orders twenty-four years of age; and no 
clergyman is eligible for a bishopric under thirty. In Scotland 
infancy is not a legal term. The time previous to majority, 
which, as in England, is reached by both sexes at twenty-one, is 
divided into two stages: pupilage lasts until the attainment of 
puberty, which the law fixes at fourteen in males and twelve in 
females; minority lasts from these ages respectively until twenty- 
one. Minority obviously corresponds in some degree to the 
English years of discretion, but a Scottish minor has more persona) 
rights than an English infant in the last stage of his infancy, e.g 



AGELADAS— AGENT 



373 



he may dispose by will of movable property, make contracts, 
carry on trade, and, as a necessary consequence, is 1 able to be 
declared a bankrupt. In France the year of majority is twenty- 
one, and the nubile age eighteen for males and fifteen for females, 
with a restriction as to the consent of guardians. Age qualifica- 
tion for the chamber of deputies is twenty-five and for the senate 
forty years. In Germany, majority is reached at twenty-one, the 
nubile age is twenty for males and sixteen for females, subject to 
the consent of parents. Without the consent of parents, the age 
is twenty-five for males and twenty-four for females. The age 
qualification for the Reichstag is twenty-five. In Austria the age 
of majority is twenty-four, and the nubile age fourteen for either 
sex, subject to the consent of the parents. In Denmark, qualified 
majority is reached at eighteen and full majority at twenty-five. 
The nubile age is twenty for males and sixteen for females. In 
Spain, majority is reached at twenty-three; the nubile age is 
eighteen for males and sixteen for females. In Greece the age 
of majority is twenty-one, and the nubile age sixteen for males 
and fourteen for females. In Holland the age of majority is 
twenty-one, and the nubile age eighteen for males and sixteen 
for females. In Italy, majority is reached at twenty-one; the 
nubile age is eighteen for males and fifteen for females. In 
Switzerland the age of majority is twenty, and. the nubile age is 
eighteen for males and sixteen for females. In the United States 
the age qualification for a president is thirty-five, for a senator 
thirty and for a representative twenty-five. 

AGELADAS, or (as the name is spelt in an inscription) 
Hagelaidas, a great Argive sculptor, who flourished in the latter 
part of the 6th and the early part of the 5th century B.C. He 
was specially noted for his statues of Olympic victors (of 520, 
516, 508 B.C.); also for a statue at Messene of Zeus, copied on 
the coins of that city. Ageladas was said to have been the 
teacher of Myron, Phidias and Polyclitus; this tradition is a 
testimony to his wide fame, though historically doubtful. We 
have no work of Ageladas surviving; but we have an inscription 
which contains the name of his son Argeiadas. 

AGEN, a city of south-western France, capital of the depart- 
ment of Lot-et-Garonne, 84 m. S.E. of Bordeaux by the Southern 
railway between Bordeaux and Toulouse. Pop. (1906) 18,640. 
It is skirted on the west by the Garonne itself, and on the north 
by its lateral canal. The river is crossed by a stone bridge, by 
a suspension bridge for foot-passengers, and by a fine canal- 
bridge, carrying the lateral canal. Pleasant promenades scretch 
for some distance along the right bank. The town is a medley 
of old narrow streets contrasting with the wide modern boule- 
vards which cross it at intervals. The chief building in Agen 
is the cathedral of St Caprais, the most interesting portion of 
which is the apse of the 12th century with its three apse-chapels; 
the transept dates from the 12th and 13th centuries, the nave 
from the 14th to the 16th centuries; the tower flanking the 
south fagade is modern. The interior is decorated with modern 
paintings and frescoes. There are several other churches, among 
them the church of the Jacobins, a brick building of the 13th 
century, and the church of St Hilaire of the 16th century, which 
has a modern tower. In the prefecture, a building of the 18th 
century, once the bishop's palace, is a collection of historical 
portraits. The hotel de ville occupies the former Hotel du 
Presidial, an obsolete tribunal, and contains the municipal 
library. Two houses of the 16th century, the Hotel d'Estrades 
and the Hotel de Vaurs, are used as the museum, which has a rich 
collection of fossils, prehistoric and Roman remains, and other 
antiquities and curiosities. The poet Jacques Jasmin was a 
native of the town, which has erected a statue to him. Through 
its excellent water communication it affords an outlet for the 
agricultural produce of the district, and forms an entrepot of 
trade between Bordeaux and Toulouse. Agen is the seat of a 
bishop. It is the seat of a court of appeal and a court of assizes, 
and has tribunals of first instance and of commerce and a 
chamber of commerce. There are also ecclesiastical seminaries, 
lycees for boys and girls, training-colleges, a school of commerce 
and industry, and a branch of the Bank of France. Agen is 
the market for a rich agricultural region. The chief articles of 



commerce are fattened poultry, prunes {pruneaux d'Agen) and 
other fruit, cork, wine, vegetables and cattle. Manufactures 
include flour, dried plums, pate de foie gras and other delicacies, 
hardware, manures, brooms, drugs, woven goods tiles. 

Agen (Aginnum) was the capital of the Celtic tribe of the 
Nitiobroges, and the discovery of extensive ruins attests its 
importance under the Romans. In later times it was the capital 
of the Agenais. Its bishopric was founded in the 4th century. 
Agen changed hands more than once in the course of the Albi- 
gensian wars, and at their close a tribunal of inquisition was 
established in the town and inflicted cruel persecution on the 
heretics. During the religious wars of the 16 th century Agen 
took the part of the Catholics and openly joined the League in 

^So- ■ ... 

See Labenazie, Histoire de la ville d'Agen et pays d'Agenois, ed. by 
A.-G. de Dampierre (1888) ; A. Ducom, La Commune d'Agen: essai 
sur son histoire et son organisation depuis son origihe jusqu'au traite 
de Bretigny (1892). 

AGENAIS, or Agenois, a former province of France. In 
ancient Gaul it was the country of the Nitiobroges with Aginnum 
for its capital, and in the 4th century it was the Civitas Agennen- 
siutn which was a part of Aquitania Secunda and which formed 
the diocese of Agen. Having in general shared the fortunes of 
Aquitaine during the Merovingian and Carolingian periods, 
Agenais next became an hereditary countship in the part of the 
country now called Gascony (Vasconia). In 1038 this count- 
ship was purchased by the dukes of Aquitaine and counts of 
Poitiers. The marriage of Eleanor of Aquitaine with Henry 
Plantagenet in 1152 brought it under the sway of England; 
but when Richard Cceur-de-Lion married his sister Joan to 
Raymund VI., count of Toulouse, in 1196, Agenais formed part 
of the princess's dowry; and with the other estates of the last 
independent count of Toulouse it lapsed to the crown of France 
in 1271. This, however, was not for long; the king of France 
had to recognize the prior rights of the king of England to the 
possession of the countship, and restored it to him in 1279. 
During the wars between the English and the French in the 14th 
and 15th centuries, Agenais was frequently taken and retaken, 
the final retreat of the English in 1453 at last leaving the king 
of France in peaceable possession. Thenceforth Agenais was 
no more than an administrative term. At the end of the ancien 
regime it formed part of the " Gouvernement " of Guienne, and 
at the Revolution it was incorporated in the department of Lot- 
et-Garonne, of which it constitutes nearly the whole. The title 
of count of Agenais, which the kings of England had allowed 
to fall into desuetude, was revived by the kings of France, and 
in 1789 was held by the family of the dukes of Richelieu. 

There is no good history of Agenais; that published by Jules 
Andrieu in 1893 (Histoire de V Agenais, 2 vols.) being quite inade- 
quate. The Bibliographie generate de V Agenais, by the same author 
(1886-189 1, 3 vols.), may be found useful. (C. B.*) 

AGENT (from Lat. agere, to act), a name applied generally to 
any person who acts for another. It has probably been adopted 
from France, as its function in modern civil law was otherwise 
expressed in Roman jurisprudence. Ducange (s.v. Agentes) 
tells us that in the later Roman empire the officers who collected 
the grain in the provinces for the troops and the household, and 
afterwards extended their functions so as to include those of 
government postmasters or spies, came to be called agentes in 
rebus, their earlier name having been jrumentarii. In law an 
agent is a person authorized, expressedly or impliedly, to act 
for another, who is thence called the principal, and who is, in 
consequence of, and to the extent of, the authority delegated 
by him, bound by the acts of his agent. (See Principal and 
Agent; Factor, &c.) 

In Scotland the procurators or solicitors who act in the pre- 
paration of cases in the various law-courts are called agents. 
(See Solicitor.) 

In France the agents de change were formerly the class gener- 
ally'licensed for conducting all negotiations, as they were termed, 
whether in commerce or the money market. The term has, 
however, become practically limited to those who conduct 
transactions in public stock. The laws and regulations as to 



374 



AGENT-GENERAL— AGGLOMERATE 



tourtiers, or those whose functions were more distinctly confined 
to transactions in merchandise, have'been mixed up with those 
applicable to agents de change. Down to the year 1572 both 
functions were free; but at that period, partly for financial 
reasons, a system of licensing was adopted at the suggestion 
of the chancellor, l'Hopital. Among the other revolutionary 
measures of the year 1791, the professions of agent and courtier 
were again opened to the public. Many of the financial con- 
vulsions of the ensuing years, which were due to more serious 
causes, were attributed to this indiscriminate removal of re- 
strictions, and they were reimposed in 1801. From that period 
regulations have been made from time to time as to the quali- 
fications of agents, the security to be found by them and the 
like. They are now regarded as public officers, appointed, with 
certain privileges and duties, by the government to act as 
intermediaries in negotiating transfers of public funds and com- 
mercial stocks and for dealing in metallic currency. (See Stock 
Exchange: France.) 

In diplomacy the term " agent " was originally applied to all 
" diplomatic agents," including ambassadors. With the evolu- 
tion of the diplomatic hierarchy, however, the term gradually 
sank until it was technically applied only to the lowest class 
of " diplomatic agents," without a' representative character and 
of a status and character so dubious that, by the regulation 
of the congress of Vienna, they were wholly excluded from the 
immunities of the diplomatic service. (See Diplomacy.) 

AGENT-GENERAL, the term given to a representative in 
England of one of the self-governing British colonies. Agents- 
general may be said to hold a position mid-way between agents 
of provinces and ambassadors of foreign countries. They are 
appointed, and their expenses and salaries provided, by the 
governments of the colonies they represent, viz. Cape of Good 
Hope, Natal, the Transvaal, New South Wales, Queensland, 
South Australia, Tasmania, Victoria, Western Australia, New 
Zealand and Canada (whose representatives are termed high 
commissioners). Their duties are to look after the political and 
economic interests of their colonies in London, to assist in all 
financial and commercial matters in which their colonies may be 
concerned, such as shipping arrangements and rates of freight, 
cable communications and rates, tenders for public works, &c, 
and to make known the products of their colonies. Those colonies 
which are not under responsible government are represented 
in London by crown agents. 

AGESANDER, a Rhodian sculptor, whose title to fame is 
that he is mentioned by Pliny {Nat. Hist, xxxvi. 37) as author 
(with Polydorus and Athenodorus) of the group of the Laocoon. 
Inscriptions recently found at Lindus in Rhodes date Agesander 
and Athenodorus to the period 42-21 B.C. The date of the 
Laocoon seems thus finally settled, after long controversy. It 
represents the culmination of a sentimental or pathetic tendency 
in art, which is prominent in the somewhat earlier sculpture of 
Pergamum. (See Greek Art.) 

AGESILAUS II., king of Sparta, of the Eurypontid family, 
was the son of Archidamus II. and Eupolia, and younger step- 
brother of Agis II., whom he succeeded about 401 B.C. Agis had, 
indeed, a son Leotychides, but he was set aside as illegitimate, 
current rumour representing him as the son of Alcibiades. 
Agesilaus' success was largely due to Lysander, who hoped to 
find in him a willing tool for the furtherance of his political 
designs; in this hope, however, Lysander war disappointed, 
and the increasing power of Agesilaus soon led to his downfall. 
In 396 Agesilaus was sent to Asia with a force of 2000 Neoda- 
modes (enfranchized Helots) and 6000 allies to secure the Greek 
cities against a Persian attack. On the eve of sailing from Aulis 
he attempted to offer a sacrifice, as Agamemnon had done before 
the Trojan expedition, but the Thebans intervened to prevent 
it, an insult for which he never forgave them. On his arrival 
at Ephesus a three months' truce was concluded with Tissa- 
phernes, the satrap of Lydia and Caria, but negotiations con- 
ducted during that time proved fruitless, and on its termination 
Agesilaus raided Phrygia, where he easily won immense booty 
since Tissaphernes had concentrated his troops in Caria. After 



spending the winter in organizing a cavalry force, he made a 
successful incursion into Lydia in the spring of 395. Tithraustes 
was thereupon sent to replace Tissaphernes, who paid with his 
life for his continued failure. An armistice was concluded 
between Tithraustes and Agesilaus, who left the southern satrapy 
and again invaded Phrygia, which he ravaged until the following 
spring. He then came to an agreement with the satrap Pharna- 
bazus and once more turned southward. It was said that he 
was planning a campaign in the interior, or even an attack on 
Artaxerxes himself, when he was recalled to Greece owing to 
the war between Sparta and the combined forces of Athens, 
Thebes, Corinth, Argos and several minor states. A rapid march 
through Thrace and Macedonia brought him to Thessaly, where 
he repulsed the Thessalian cavalry who tried to impede him. 
Reinforced by Phocian and Orchomenian troops and a Spartan 
army, he met the confederate forces at Coronea in Boeotia, 
and in a hotly contested battle was technically victorious, but 
the success was a barren one and he had to retire by way of 
Delphi to the Peloponnese. Shortly before this battle the 
Spartan navy, of which he had received the supreme command, 
was totally defeated off Cnidus by a powerful Persian fleet under 
Conon and Pharnabazus. 

Subsequently Agesilaus took a prominent part in the 
Corinthian war, making several successful expeditions into 
Corinthian territory and capturing Lechaeum and Piraeum. 
The loss, however, of a mora, which was destroyed by Iphicrates, 
neutralized these successes, and Agesilaus returned to Sparta. 
In 389 he conducted a campaign in Acarnania, but two years 
later the Peace of Antalcidas, which was warmly supported by 
Agesilaus, put an end to hostilities. When war broke out afresh 
with Thebes the king twice invaded Boeotia (378, 377), and it 
was on his advice that Cleombrotus was ordered to march against 
Thebes in 371. Cleombrotus was defeated at Leuctra and the 
Spartan supremacy overthrown. In 370 Agesilaus tried to 
restore Spartan prestige by an invasion of Mantinean territory, 
and his prudence and heroism saved Sparta when her enemies, 
led by Epaminondas, penetrated Laconia that same year, and 
again in 362 when they all but succeeded in seizing the city by 
a rapid and unexpected march. The battle of Mantinea (362), 
in which Agesilaus took no part, was followed by a general peace: 
Sparta, however, stood aloof, hoping even yet to recover her 
supremacy. In order to gain money for prosecuting the war 
Agesilaus had supported the revolted satraps, and in 361 he 
went to Egypt at the head of a mercenary force to aid Tachos 
against Persia. He soon transferred his services to Tachos's 
cousin and rival Nectanabis, who, in return for his help, gave 
him a sum of over 200 talents. On his way home Agesilaus died 
at the age of 84, after a reign of some 41 years. 

A man of small stature and unimpressive appearance, he was 
somewhat lame from birth, a fact which was used as an argument 
against his succession, an oracle having warned Sparta against 
a " lame reign." He was a successful leader in guerilla warfare, 
alert and quick, yet cautious — a man, moreover, whose personal 
bravery was unquestioned. As a statesman he won himself 
both enthusiastic adherents and bitter enemies, but of his 
patriotism there can be no doubt. He lived in the most frugal 
style alike at home and in the field, and though his campaigns 
were undertaken largely to secure booty, he was content to 
enrich the state and his friends and to return as poor as he had 
set forth. The worst trait in his character is his implacable 
hatred of Thebes, which led directly to the battle of Leuctra and 
Sparta's fall from her position of supremacy. 

See lives of Agesilaus by Xenophon (the panegyric of a friend), 
Cornelius Nepos and Plutarch ; Xenophon's Hellenica and Diodorus 
xiv., xv. Among modern authorities, besides the general histories of 
Greece, J. C. F. Manso, Sparta, iii. 39 ff. ; G. F. Hertzberg, Das Leben 
des Konigs Agesilaos II. von Sparta (1856); Buttmann, Agesilaus 
Sohn des Archidamus (1872); C. Haupt, Agesilaus in Asien (1874); 
E. von Stern, Geschichte der spartanischen und thebanischen Hege- 
monie (1884). . (M. N. T.) 

AGGLOMERATE (from the Lat. agglomerare, to form into a 
ball, glomus, glomeris), a term used in botany, meaning crowded 
in a close cluster or head, and, in geology, applied to the 



AGGLUTINATION— AGINCOURT 



375 



accumulations of coarse volcanic ejectamenta such as frequently 
occur near extinct or active volcanoes. Agglomerates in the 
geological sense, with which this article is concerned, consist 
typically of blocks of various igneous rocks, mixed often with 
more or less material of rudimentary origin and embedded in a 
finer-grained matrix, similar in nature to the coarser fragments. 
As distinguished from ordinary ash beds or tuffs, they are 
essentially coarser, less frequently well-bedded; they are less 
persistent and tend to occur locally, but may attain a very great 
thickness. Showers of fine ash may be distributed over a wide 
area of country and will form thin layers of great extent. 
Coarser accumulations gather only near the actual foci of 
eruption (craters, fissures, &c). When the activity of a volcanic 
vent comes to an end, the orifice is often choked by masses of 
debris, which will in time become compacted into firm agglomer- 
ates. Hence rocks of this type very commonly mark the sites 
of necks, the remains of once-active volcanic craters. In this 
connexion they are of especial interest to geologists, as it is always 
important to be able tc locate the exact points at which volcanic 
products, such as lavas and ash-beds, were emitted. 

The blocks in agglomerates vary greatly in size. Some are 
thirty or forty feet in diameter, and weigh many tons; these 
are usually pieces of the strata through which the volcano has 
forced an outlet. They are never far from the crater; most of 
them, in fact, lie within its boundaries, and cases are known in 
which enormous masses of this kind (half an acre in area) have 
been found in such situations. They are masses which have 
been dislodged, by fissures and landslides, from the crater's 
walls and have tumbled into the cavity. Pieces of sandstone, 
limestone and shale occur in the agglomerates mixed with 
volcanic materials, and very often have been baked and partly 
recrystallized by contact with the hot igneous rocks and the 
gases discharged by the volcano. At Vesuvius such blocks of 
altered limestone are rich in new minerals and are well known 
to collectors. 

Agglomerates also are usually full of volcanic bombs. These 
are spongy globular masses of lava which have been shot from 
the crater at a time when liquid molten lava was exposed in it, 
and was frequently shattered by the sudden outbursts of steam. 
These bombs were more or less viscous at the moment of ejection 
and by rotation in the air acquired their spheroidal form. They 
are commonly one or two feet in diameter, but specimens as 
large as nine or twelve feet have been observed. There is less 
variety in their composition at any volcanic centre than in the 
case of the foreign blocks above described. They correspond in 
nature to the lava which at the time fills the crater of the volcano, 
and as this varies only very slowly the bombs belong mostly 
to only a few kinds of rock and are similar in composition to the 
lava flows. 

Crystalline masses of a different kind occur in some numbers 
in certain agglomerates. They consist of volcanic minerals 
very much the same as those formed in the lavas, but exhibiting 
certain peculiarities which indicate that they have formed slowly 
under pressure at considerable depths. Hence they bear a 
resemblance to plutonic igneous rocks, but are more correctly 
to be regarded as agglomerations of crystals formed within the 
liquid lava as it slowly rose towards the surface, and at a sub- 
sequent period cast out by violent steam explosions. The 
sanidinites of the Eifel belong to this group. At Vesuvius, 
Ascension, St Vincent and many other volcanoes, they form 
a not inconsiderable part of the coarser ash-beds. Their 
commonest minerals are olivine, anorthite, hornblende, augite, 
biotite and leucite. 

Agglomerates occur wherever volcanoes are known. In many 
parts of Britain they attain a great development either in beds 
alternating with lavas or as the material occupying necks. In the 
latter case they are often penetrated by dikes. They also show a 
steep, angular, funnel-shaped dip (e.g. Arthur's Seat, Edinburgh), 
and may contain thin layers of clay or ashy sand-stone, which 
gathered in the crater during intervals of repose. (J. S. F.) 

AGGLUTINATION (Lat. ad, and gluten, glutinare, literally to 
fasten together with glue), a term used technically in philology 



for the method of word-formation by which two significant 
words or roots are joined together in a single word to express 
a combination of the two meanings each of which retains its 
force. This juxtaposition or conjoining of roots is characteristic 
of languages such as the Turkish and Japanese, which are there- 
fore known as agglutinative, as opposed to others, known 
generically as inflexional, in which differences of termination or 
combinations in which all separate identity disappears are 
predominant. 

The term was also formerly used by associationist philosophers 
for those mental associations which were regarded as peculiarly 
close. Combination in its simplest form has been called 
Agglutination by W. Wundt. 

AGGRAVATION (from Lat. ad, increasing, and gravis, 
heavy), the making anything graver or more serious, especially 
of offences; also used as synonymous with " irritation." In 
the canon law " aggravation " was a form 01 ecclesiastical 
censure, threatening excommunication after three disregarded 
admonitions. 

AGGREGATION (from the Lat. ad, to, gregare, to collect 
together), in physics, a collective term for the forms or states 
in which matter exists. Three primary " states of aggregation " 
are recognized — gaseous, liquid and solid. Generally, if a solid 
be heated to a certain temperature, it melts or fuses, assuming 
the liquid condition (see P'usion); if the heating be continued 
the liquid boils and becomes a vapour (see Vaporization). On 
the other hand, if a gas be sufficiently cooled and compressed, it 
liquefies; this transition is treated theoretically in the article 
Condensation of Gases, and experimentally in the article 
Liquid Gases. 

AGGTELEK, a village of Hungary, in the county of Gomor, 
situated to the south of Rozsnyo, on the road from Budapest 
to Dobsina. Pop. (1900) 557. In the neighbourhood is the 
celebrated Aggtelek or Baradla cavern, one of the largest and 
most remarkable stalactite grottos in Europe. It has a length, 
together with its ramifications, of over 5 miles, and is formed 
of two caverns — one known for several centuries, and another 
discovered by the naturalist Adolf Schmidl in 1856. Two 
entrances give access to the grotto, an old one extremely narrow, 
and a new one, made in 1890, through which the exploration 
of the cavern can be made in about 8 hours, half the time it took 
before. The cavern is composed of a l'abyrinth of passages 
and large and small halls, and is traversed by a stream. In these 
caverns there are numerous stalactite structures, which, from 
their curious and fantastic shapes, have received such names as 
the Image of the Virgin, the Mosaic Altar, &c. The principal 
parts are the Paradies with the finest stalactites, the Astro- 
nomical Tower and the Beinhaus. Rats, frogs and bats form 
actually the only animal life in the caves, but a great number 
of antediluvian animal bones have been found here, as well 
as human bones and numerous remains of prehistoric human 
settlements. 

AGINCOURT (Azincourt), a village of northern France in the 
department of Pas de Calais, 14 m. N.W. of St Pol by road, 
famous on account of the victory, on the 25th of October 1415, of 
Henry V. of England over the French. The battle was fought in 
the defile formed by the wood of Agincourt and that of Trame- 
court, at the northern exit of which the army under d'Albret, 
constable of France, had placed itself so as to bar the way to 
Calais against the English forces which had been campaigning on 
the Somme. The night of the 24th of October was spent by the 
two armies on the ground, and the English had but little shelter 
from the heavy rain which fell. Early on the 25th, St Crispin's 
day, Henry arrayed his little army (about 1000 men-at-arms, 
6000 archers, and a few thousands of other foot). It is probable 
that the usual three " battles " were drawn up in line, each with 
its archers on the flanks and the dismounted men-at-arms in the 
centre; the archers being thrown forward in wedge-shaped 
salients, almost exactly as at Crecy (q.v.). The French, on the 
other hand, were drawn up in three lines, each line formed in deep 
masses. They were at least four times more numerous than the 
English, but restricted by the nature of the ground to the same 



37^ 



AGIO— AGIS 



extent of front, they were unable to use their full weight (cf. 
Bannockbum) ; further, the deep mud prevented their artillery 
from taking part, and the crossbowmen were as usual relegated to 
the rear of the knights and men-at-arms. All were dismounted 
save a few knights and men-at-arms on the flanks, who were 
intended to charge the archers of the enemy. For three hours 
after sunrise there was no fighting; then Henry, finding that the 
French would not advance, moved his army farther into the 
defile. The archers fixed the pointed stakes, which they carried 
to ward off cavalry charges, and opened the engagement with 
flights of arrows. The chivalry of France, undisciplined and 
careless of the lesson of Crecy and Poitiers, was quickly stung 
into action, and the French mounted men charged, only to be 
driven back in confusion. The constable himself headed the 
leading line of dismounted men-at-arms; weighted with their 
armour, and sinking deep into the mud with every step, they yet 
reached and engaged the English men-at-arms; for a time the 
fighting was severe. The thin line of the defenders was borne 
back and King Henry was almost beaten to the ground. But at 
this moment the archers, taking their hatchets, swords or other 
weapons, penetrated the gaps in the now disordered French, who 
could not move to cope with their unarmoured assailants, and 
were slaughtered or taken prisoners to a man. The second line 
of the French came on, only to be engulfed in the milee; its 
leaders, like those of the first line, were killed or taken, and the 
commanders of the third sought and found their death in the 
battle, while their men rode off to safety. The closing scene of 
the battle was a half-hearted attack made by a body of fugitives, 
which led merely to the slaughter of the French prisoners, which 
was ordered by Henry because he had not enough men both to 
guard them and to meet the attack. The slaughter ceased when 
the assailants drew off. The total loss of the English is stated at 
thirteen men-at-arms (including the duke of York, grandson of 
Edward III.) and about ioo of the foot. The French lost 5000 of 
noble birth killed, including the constable, 3 dukes, 5 counts and 
90 barons; 1000 more were taken prisoners, amongst them the 
duke of Orleans (the Charles d'Orleans of literature). 

See Sir Harris Nicolas, Battle of Agincourt; Fortescue, History of 
the British Army, vol. i.; and H. B. George, Battles of English 
History. 

AGIO (Ital. aggio, exchange, discount, premium), a term used 
in commerce in three slightly different connexions, (a) The 
variations from fixed pars or rates of exchange in the currencies 
of different countries. For example, in most of the gold-standard 
countries, the standard coin is kept up to a uniform point of 
fineness, so that an English sovereign fresh from the mint will 
bear the following constant relation to coins of other countries in 
a similar condition: — £i = frcs. 25-221 = mks. 20-429 = $4-867, 
&c. This is what is known as the mint par of exchange. But 
the mint par of exchange, say, between France and England is 
not necessarily the market value of French currency in England, 
or English currency in France. The balance of trade between the 
various countries is the factor determining the rate of exchange. 
Should the balance of trade (q.v.) be against England, money must 
be remitted to France in payment of the indebtedness, but owing 
to the cost for /the transmission of specie there will be a demand 
for bills drawn on Paris as a cheaper and more expeditious 
method of sending money, and it therefore will be necessary, in 
order to procure the one of the higher current value, to pay a 
premium for it, called the agio. (b) The term is also used to 
denote the difference in exchange between two currencies in the 
same country; where silver coinage is the legal tender, agio is 
sometimes allowed for payment in the more convenient form of 
gold, or where the paper currency of a country is reduced below 
the bullion which it professes to represent, an agio is payable on 
the appreciated currency, (c) Lastly, in some states the coinage 
is so debased, owing to the wear of circulation, that the real is 
greatly reduced below the nominal value. Supposing that this 
reduction amounts to 5%, then if 100 sovereigns were offered as 
payment of a debt in England while such sovereigns were current 
there at their nominal value, they would be received as just 
payment; but if they were offered as payment of the same 



amount of debt in a foreign state, they would be received only at 
their intrinsic value of £95, the additional £5 constituting the 
agio. Where the state keeps its coinage up to a standard value 
no agio is required. 

AGIRA (formerly San Filippo d'Argiro), a town of the 
province of Catania, Sicily, with a railway station 4^ m. to the 
south of the town, 35 m. W. of Catania. Pop. (1901) 17,738. It 
occupies the site of Agyrion, an ancient Sicel city*which was ruled 
by tyrants, one of whom, Agyris, was the most powerful ruler in 
the centre of Sicily. He was a contemporary of Dionysius I. , and 
with him successfully resisted the Carthaginians when they 
invaded the territory of Agyrium in 392 B.C. Agira was not 
colonized by the Greeks until Timoleon drove out the last tyrant 
in 339 b.c. and erected various splendid buildings of which no 
traces remain. Agyrion was the birthplace of the historian 
Diodorus Siculus. 

AGIS, the name of four Spartan kings: — 

(1) Son of Eurysthenes, founder of the royal house of the 
Agiadae (Pausanias iii. 2.1). His genealogy was traced through 
Aristodemus, Aristomachus, Cleodaeus and Hyllus to Heracles 
(Herodotus vii. 204), and he belongs rather to mythology than 
to history. Tradition ascribed to him the capture of the maritime 
town of Helos, which resisted his attempt to curtail its guaranteed 
rights, and the institution of the class of serfs called Helots (q.v.). 

Ephorus ap. Strabo, viii. p. 365. 

(2) Son of Archidamus II., Eurypontid, commonly called 
Agis I. He succeeded his father, probably in 427 B.C., and from 
his first invasion of Attica in 425 down to the close of the Pelopon- 
nesian war was the chief leader of the Spartan operations on 
land. After the conclusion of the peace of Nicias (421 B.C.) 
he marched against the Argives in defence of Epidaurus, and 
after skilful manoeuvring surrounded the Argive army, and 
seemed to have victory within his grasp when he unaccountably 
concluded a four months' truce and withdrew his forces. The 
Spartans were indignant, and when the Argives and their allies, 
in flagrant disregard of the truce, took Arcadian Orchomenus 
and prepared to march on Tegea, their fury knew no bounds, 
and Agis escaped having his house razed and a fine of 100,000 
drachmae imposed only by promising to atone for his error by 
a signal victory. This promise he brilliantly fulfilled by routing 
the forces of the Argive confederacy at the battle of Mantinea 
(418), the moral effect of which was out of all proportion to the 1 
losses inflicted on the enemy. In the winter 417-416 a further 
expedition to Argos resulted in the destruction of the half- 
finished Long Walls and the capture of Hysiae. In 413, on the 
suggestion of Alcibiades, he fortified Decelea in Attica, where he 
remained directing operations until, after the battle of Aegospo- 
tami (405), he took the leading part in the blockade of Athens, 
which was ended in spring 404 by the surrender of the city. 
Subsequently he invaded and ravaged Elis, forcing the Eleans 
to acknowledge the freedom of their perioeci and to allow 
Spartans to take part in the Olympic games and sacrifices. He 
fell ill on his return from Delphi, where he had gone to dedicate 
a tithe of the spoils, and, probably in 401, died at Sparta, where 
he was buried with unparalleled solemnity and pomp. 

Thuc. iii. 89, iv. 2. 6, v., vii. 19. 27, viii.; Xenophon, Hellenica, 
i. I, ii. 2. 3, iii. 2. 3; Diodorus xii. 35, xiii. 72, 73, 107; Pausanias 
iii. 8. 3-8; Plutarch, Lysander ix. 14. 22, Alcibiades 23-25, Lycurgus 
12, Agesilaus i. 3, de Tranquill.Anim. 6. (See Peloponnesian War.) 

(3) Son of Archidamus III., of the Eurypontid line, commonly 
called Agis II. He succeeded his father in 338 b.c, on the very 
day of the battle of Chaeronea. During Alexander's Asiatic 
campaign he revolted against Macedonia (333 B.C.) and, with 
the aid of Persian money and ships and a force of 8000 Greek 
mercenaries, gained considerable successes in Crete. In the 
Peloponnese he routed a force under Corragus and, although 
Athens held aloof, he was joined by Elis, Achaea (except Pellene) 
and Arcadia, with the exception of Megalopolis, which the allies 
besieged. Antipater marched rapidly to its relief at the head 
of a large army, and the allied force was defeated after a desperate 
struggle (331) and Agis was slain. 

Pausanias iii. 10. 5; Diodorus xvii. 48, 62, 63; Justin xii. 1; 
Quintus Curtius iv. I, 39, vi. 1 ; Arrian, Anabasis, ii. 13. 



AGISTMENT— AGNES, SAINT 



377 



(4) Son of Eudamidas II., of the Eurypontid family, commonly 
called Agis III. He succeeded his father probably in 245 B.C., 
in his twentieth year. At this time the state had been brought 
to the brink of ruin by the growth of avarice and luxury; there 
was a glaring inequality in the distribution of land and wealth, 
and the number of full citizens had sunk to 700, of whom about 
100 practically monopolized the land. Though reared in the 
height of luxury he at once determined to restore the traditional 
institutions of Lycurgus, with the aid of Lysander, a descendant 
of the victor of Aegospotami, and Mandrocleidas, a man of noted 
prudence and courage; even his mother, the wealthy Agesistrata, 
threw herself heartily into the cause. A powerful but not 
disinterested ally was found in the king's uncle, Agesilaus, 
who hoped to rid himself of his debts without losing his vast 
estates. Lysander as ephor proposed on behalf of Agis that all 
debts should be cancelled and that Laconia should be divided 
into 19,500 lots, of which 4500 should be given to Spartiates, 
whose number was to be recruited from the best of the perioeci 
and foreigners, and the remaining 15,000 to perioeci who could 
bear arms. The Agiad king Leonidas having prevailed on the 
council to reject this measure, though by a majority of only one, 
was deposed in favour of his son-in-law Cleombrotus, who assisted 
Agis in bearing down opposition by the threat of force. The 
abolition of debts was carried into effect, but the land distribu- 
tion was put qff by Agesilaus ou various pretexts. At this point 
Aratus appealed to Sparta to help the Achaeans in repelling 
an expected Aetolian attack, and Agis was sent to the Isthmus 
at the head of an army. In his absence the open violence and 
extortion of Agesilaus, combined with the popular disappoint- 
ment at the failure of the agrarian scheme, brought about the 
restoration of Leonidas and the deposition of Cleombrotus, who 
took refuge at the temple of Apollo at Taenarum and escaped 
death only at the entreaty of his wife, Leonidas's daughter 
Chilonis. On his return Agis fled to the temple of Athene 
Chalcioecus at Sparta, but soon afterwards he was treacherously 
induced to leave his asylum and, after a mockery of a trial, was 
strangled in prison, his mother and grandmother sharing the 
same fate (241). Though too weak and good-natured to cope 
with the problem which confronted him, Agis was characterized 
by a sincerity of purpose and a blend of youthful modesty with 
royal dignity, which render him perhaps the most attractive 
figure in the whole of Spartan history. 

See Plutarch's biography. Pausanias' accounts (ii. 8. 5, vii. 7. 3, 
viii. 10. 5-8, 27. 13) of his attack on Megalopolis, his seizure of 
Pcllene and his death at Mantinea fighting against the Arcadians, 
Achaeans and Sicyonians are without foundation (J. C. F. Manso, 
Sparta, iii. 2. 123-127). See also Manso, op. cit. iii. I. 276-302; 
B. Niese, Geschichte der griechischen und makedonischen Staaten, ii. 
299-303. (M.N.T.) 

AGISTMENT. To " agist " (from O. Fr. agister, derived from 
gesir — Lat. jacere — to lie) is, in law, to take cattle to graze, 
for a remuneration. " Agistment," in the first instance, referred 
more particularly to the proceeds of pasturage in the king's 
forests, but now means either (a) the contract for taking in and 
feeding horses or other cattle on pasture land, for the considera- 
tion of a weekly payment of money, or (b) the profit derived 
from such pasturing. Agistment is a contract of bailment, and 
the bailer is bound to take reasonable care of the animals entrusted 
to him; he is responsible for damages and injury which result 
from ordinary casualties, if it be proved that such might have 
been prevented by the exercise of great care. There is no lien 
on the cattle for the price of the agistment, unless by express 
agreement. Under the Agricultural Holdings Act 1883, agisted 
cattle cannot be distrained on for rent if there be other sufficient 
distress to be found, and if such other distress be not found, and 
the cattle be distrained, the owner may redeem them on pay- 
ing the price of their agistment. The tithe of agistment or 
" tithe of cattle and other produce of grass lands," was formally 
abolished by the act of union in 1707, on a motion submitted 
with a view to defeat that measure. 

AGITATORS, or Adjutators, the name given to representa- 
tives elected in 1647 by the different regiments of the English 
Parliamentary army. The word really means an agent, but it 



was confused with " adjutant," often called " agitant," a title 
familiar to the soldiers, and thus the form " adjutator " came 
into use. Early in 1647 the Long Parliament wished either to 
disband many of the regiments or to send them to Ireland. The 
soldiers, whose pay was largely in arrear, refused to accept 
either alternative, and eight of the cavalry regiments elected 
agitators, called at first commissioners, who laid their grievances 
before the three generals, and whose letter was read in the House 
of Commons on the 30th of April 1647. The other regiments 
followed the example of the cavalry, and the agitators, who 
belonged to the lower ranks of the army, were supported by 
many of the officers, who showed their sympathy by signing 
the Declaration of the army. Cromwell and other generals suc- 
ceeded to some extent in pacifying the troops by promising the 
payment of arrears for eight weeks at once ; but before the return 
of the generals to London parliament had again decided to 
disband the army, and soon afterwards fixed the 1st of June 
as the date on which this process was to begin. Again alarmed, 
the agitators decided to resist; a mutiny occurred in one 
regiment and the attempt at disbandment failed. Then 
followed the seizure of the king by Cornet Joyce, Cromwell's 
definite adherence to the policy of the army, the signing of the 
manifestoes, a Humble Representation and a Solemn Engagement 
and the establishment of the army council composed of officers 
and agitators. Having, at an assembly on Thriplow Heath, 
near Royston, virtually refused the offers made by parliament, 
the agitators demanded a march towards London and the 
" purging " of the House of Commons. Subsequent events are 
part of the general history of England. Gradually the agitators 
ceased to exist, but many of their ideas were adopted by the 
Levellers (q.v.), who may perhaps be regarded as their successors. 
Gardiner says of them, " Little as it was intended at the time, 
nothing was more calculated than the existence of this elected 
body of agitators to give to the army that distinctive political 
and religious character which it ultimately bore." 

See S. R. Gardiner, History of the Great Civil War, vols. iii. and iv. 
(London, 1905). 

AGLIARDI, ANTONIO (1832- ), papal diplomatist, was 
born at Cologno (Bergamo), Italy, on the 4th of September 1832. 
He studied theology and canon law, and, after acting as parish 
priest in his native diocese for twelve years, was sent by the pope 
to Canada as a bishop's chaplain. On his return he was ap- 
pointed secretary to the Propaganda. In 1884 he was created 
by Leo XIII. archbishop of Caesarea in partibus and sent to 
India to report on the establishment of the hierarchy there. In 
1887 he again visited India, to carry out the terms of the con- 
cordat arranged with Portugal. The same year he was appointed 
secretary to the Congregation super negotiis ecclesiae extraordi- 
nariis, in 1889 became papal nuncio at Munich and in 1892 
at Vienna. Allowing himself to be involved in the ecclesiastical 
disputes by which Hungary was divided in 1895, he was made 
the subject of formal complaint by the Hungarian government 
and in 1896 was recalled. His services were rewarded by a 
cardinalate and the archbishopric of Ferrara. In 1903 he was 
named vice-chancellor of the Roman Church. 

AGNANO, LAGO DI, a circular lake, 5 m. W. of Naples, Italy. 
It was apparently not formed until the middle ages, as it is not 
mentioned by ancient writers; it was drained in 1870. It 
occupied the crater of an extinct volcano, 4 m. in circumference. 
On the south bank are the Stufe di S. Germano, natural sul- 
phureous vapour baths, and close by is the Grotta del Cane, from 
the floor of which warm carbonic acid gas constantly rises to a 
height of 18 in., the fumes of which render a dog insensible in 
a few seconds. It is mentioned by Pliny (Nat. Hist. ii. 93). 
Remains of an extensive Roman building and some statues 
have been discovered close by. 

AGNATES (Agnati), in Roman law, persons related through 
males only, as opposed to cognates. Agnation was founded on 
the idea of the family held together by the patria potestas; 
cognatio involves simply the modern idea of kindred. 

AGNES, SAINT, a virgin martyr of the Catholic Church. The 
legend of St Agnes is that she was a Roman maid, by birth a 



378 



AGNES OF MERAN— AGNOSTICISM 



Christian, who suffered martyrdom when but thirteen during 
the reign of the emperor Diocletian, on the 21st of January 304. 
The prefect Sempronius wished her to marry his son, and on her 
refusal condemned her to be outraged before her execution, but 
her honour was miraculously preserved. When led out to die 
she was tied to a stake, but the faggots would not burn, where- 
upon the officer in charge of the troops drew his sword and 
struck off her head. St Agnes is the patron saint of young girls, 
who, in rural districts, formerly indulged in all sorts of quaint 
country magic on St Agnes' Eve (2oth-2ist January) with a 
view to discovering their future husbands. This superstition 
has been immortalized in Keats's poem, " The Eve of St Agnes." 
St Agnes's bones are supposed to rest in the church of her name 
at Rome, originally built by Constantine and repaired by Pope 
Honorius in the 7th century. Here on her festival (21st of 
January) two lambs are specially blessed after pontifical high 
mass, and their wool is later woven into pallia (see Pallium). 

AGNES OF MERAN (d. 1201), queen of France, was the 
daughter of Bertold IV., duke of Meran in Tirol. She is called 
Marie by some of the chroniclers. In June 1106 she married 
Philip II., king of France,, who had repudiated Ingeborg of 
Denmark in 1193. The pope espoused the cause of Ingeborg; 
but Philip did not submit until 1200, when, interdict having 
been added to excommunication, he consented to a separation 
from Agnes. She died in July of the next year, at the castle 
of Poissy, and was buried in the church of St Corentin, near 
Nantes. Her two children by Philip II., Philip, count of Cler- 
mont (d. 1234), and Mary, who married Philip, count of Namur, 
were legitimized by Innocent III. in 1201 on the demand of the 
king. Little is known of the personality of Agnes, beyond the 
remarkable influence which she exercised over Philip II. She 
has been made the heroine of a tragedy by Francois Ponsard, 
Agnes de Meranie. 

See the notes of Robert Davidsohn in Philipp. II. August von 
Frankreich und Ingeborg (Stuttgart, 1888). A genealogical notice is 
furnished by the Chronicon of the monk Alberic (Aubry) of Trois- 
Fontaines, (Albericus Trium Fontium) in Pertz, Scriptores, vol. xxiii. 
pp. 872 f., and by the Genealogia Wettinensis, ibid. p. 229. 

AGNESI, MARIA GAETANA (17 18-1799), Italian mathe- 
matician, linguist and philosopher, was born at Milan on the 16th 
of May 1 7 18, her father being professor of mathematics in the 
university of Bologna. When only nine years old she had such 
command of Latin as to be able to publish an elaborate address 
in that language, maintaining that the pursuit of liberal studies 
was not improper for her sex. By her thirteenth year she had 
acquired Greek, Hebrew, French, Spanish, German and other 
languages. Two years later her father began to assemble in his 
house at stated intervals a circle of the most learned men in 
Bologna, before whom she read and maintained a series of theses 
on the most abstruse philosophical questions. Records of these 
meetings are given in de Brosse's Leltres sur I'ltalie and in the 
Propositiones Philosophicae, which her father caused to be 
published in 1738. These displays, being probably not alto- 
gether congenial to Maria, who was of a retiring disposition, 
ceased in her twentieth year, and it is even said that she had 
at that age a strong desire to enter a convent. Though the wish 
was not gratified, she lived from that time in a. retirement 
almost conventual, avoiding all society and devoting herself 
entirely to the study of mathematics. The most valuable result 
of her labours was the Instituzioni analitiche ad uso della 
gioventu italia-na, a work of great merit, which was published 
at Milan in 1748. The first volume treats of the analysis of 
finite quantities, and the second of the analysis of infinitesimals. 
A French translation of the second volume by P. T. d'Antelmy, 
with additions by Charles Bossut (1730-1814), appeared at 
Paris in 1775; and an English translation of the whole work 
by John Colson (1680- 17 60), the Lucasian professor of mathe- 
matics at Cambridge, was published in 1801 at the expense of 
Baron Maseres. Madame Agnesi also wrote a commentary 
on the Traite analytique des sections coniques of the marquis de 
l'Hopital, which, though highly praised by those who saw it in 
manuscript, was never published. She invented and discussed 
the curve known as the " witch of Agnesi " (q.v.) or versiera. 



In 1750, on the illness of her father, she was appointed by Pope 
Benedict XIV. to the chair of mathematics and natural philo- 
sophy at Bologna. After the death of her father in 1752 she 
carried out a long-cherished purpose by giving herself to the 
study of theology, and especially of the Fathers. After holding 
for some years the office of directress of the Hospice Trivulzio 
for Blue Nuns at Milan, she herself joined the sisterhood, and in 
this austere order ended her days on the 9th of January 1 799. 

Her sister, Maria Teresa Agnesi (1724-1780), a well-known 
Italian pianist and composer, was born at Milan in 1724. She 
composed several cantatas, two pianoforte concertos and five 
operas, Sofonisbe, Ciro in Armenia, Nitocri, II Re Pastor e and 
Insubria consolata. 

See Antonio Francesco Frisi, liloge historique de Mademoiselle 
Agnesi, translated by Boulard (Paris, 1807) ; Milesi-Mojon, Vita 
di M._G. Agnesi (Milan, 1836)'; J. Boyer, "La Mathematicienne 
Agnesi," in the Revue Catholique des revues francaises et etrangeres 
(Paris, 1897). 

AGNEW, DAVID HAYES (1818-1892), American surgeon, 
was born in Lancaster county, Pennsylvania, on the 24th of 
November 1818. He graduated from the medical department 
of the university of Pennsylvania in 1838, and a few years later 
set up in practice at Philadelphia and became a lecturer at the 
Philadelphia School of Anatomy. He was appointed surgeon 
at the Philadelphia Hospital in 1854 and was the founder of its 
pathological museum. For twenty-six years (1863-1889) he was 
connected with the medical faculty of the university of Penn- 
sylvania, being elected professor of operative surgery in 1870 
and professor of the principles and practice of surgery in the 
following year. From 1865 to 1884 — except for a brief interval 
— he was a surgeon at the Pennsylvania Hospital. During the 
American Civil War he was consulting surgeon in the Mower 
Army Hospital, near Philadelphia, and acquired considerable 
reputation for his operations in cases of gun-shot wounds. He 
attended as operating surgeon when President Garfield was 
fatally wounded by the bullet of an assassin in 188 1. He was 
the author of several works, the most important being The 
Principles and Practice of Surgery (1878-1883). He died at 
Philadelphia on the 22nd of March 1892. 

AGNI, the Hindu God of Fire, second only to Indra in the 
power and importance attributed to him in Vedic mythology. 
His name is the first word of the first hymn of the Rig-veda: 
" Agni, I entreat, divine appointed priest of sacrifice." The 
sacrifices made to Agni pass to the gods, for Agni is a messenger 
from and to the gods; but, at the same time, he is more than a 
mere messenger, he is an immortal, for another hymn runs: 
" No god indeed, no mortal is beyond the might of thee, the 
mighty One. ..." He is a god who lives among men, mira- 
culously reborn each day by the fire-drill, by the friction of the 
two sticks which are regarded as his parents; he is the supreme 
director of religious ceremonies and duties,and even has the power 
of influencing the lot Of man in the future world. He is wor- 
shipped under a threefold form, fire on earth, lightning and the 
sun. His cult survived the metamorphosis of the ancient Vedic 
nature-worship into modern Hinduism, and there still are in 
India fire-priests (agniholri) whose duty is to superintend his 
worship. The sacred fire-drill for procuring the temple-fire by 
friction — symbolic of Agni's daily miraculous birth — is still used. 
In pictorial art Agni is always represented as red, two-faced, 
suggesting his destructive and beneficent qualities, and with 
three legs and seven arms. 

See W. J. Wilkins, Hindu Mythology (London, 1900) ; A. A. 
Macdonell, Vedic Mythology (Strassburg, 1897). 

AGNOETAE (Gr. ayvoeco, to be ignorant of), a monophysite 
sect who maintained that Christ's human nature was like other 
men's in all respects, including limited knowledge. Its founder 
was Themistius, a deacon in Alexandria in the 6th century. 
The sect was anathematized by Gregory the Great. 

AGNOIOLOGY (from Gr. &yvoi-a, ignorance), the science or 
study of ignorance, which determines its quality and conditions. 

AGNOSTICISM. The term " agnostic " was invented by 
Huxley in 1869 to describe the philosophical and religious 
attitude of those who hold that we can have scientific or real 



AGNOSTICISM 



379 



knowledge of phenomena only, and that so far as what may lie 
behind phenomena is concerned — God, immortality, &c— there 
is no evidence which entitles us either to deny or affirm anything. 
The attitude itself is as old as Scepticism (q.v.) ; but the expres- 
sions " agnostic " and " agnosticism " were applied by Huxley 
to sum up his deductions from those contemporary developments 
of metaphysics with which the names of Hamilton (" the Un- 
conditioned ") and Herbert Spencer (" the Unknowable ") were 
associated; and it is important, therefore, to fix precisely his 
own intellectual standpoint in the matter. Though Huxley only 
began to use the term " agnostic " in 1869, his opinions had taken 
shape some time before that date. In a letter to Charles 
Kingsley (September 23, i860) he wrote very fully concerning 
his beliefs: — 

" I neither affirm nordenythe immortality of man. I see no reason 
for believing it, but, on the other hand, I have no means of disprov- 
ing it. I have no a priori objections to the doctrine. No man who 
has to deal daily and hourly with nature can trouble himself about 
a priori difficulties. Give me such evidence as would justify me in 
believing in anything else, and I will believe that. Why should I not? 
It is not half so wonderful as the conservation of force or the inde- 
structibility of matter. . . . 

" It is no use to talk to me of analogies and probabilities. I know 
what I mean when I say I believe in the law of the inverse squares, and 
I will not rest my life and my hopes upon weaker convictions. . . . 

" That my personality is the surest thing I know may be true. But 
the attempt to conceive what it is leads me into mere verbal subtleties. 
I have champed up all that chaff about the ego and the non-ego, 
noumena and phenomena, and all the rest of it, too often not to know 
that in attempting even to think of these questions, the human in- 
tellect flounders at once out of its depth." 

And again, to the same correspondent, the 5th of May 1863:— 
" I have never had the least sympathy with the a priori reasons 
against orthodoxy, and I have by nature and disposition the greatest 
possible antipathy to all the atheistic and infidel school. Neverthe- ; 
less I know that I am, in spite of myself, exactly what the Christian 
would call, and, so far as I can see, is justified in calling, atheist and 
infidel. I cannot see one shadow or tittle of evidence that the great 
unknown underlying the phenomenon of the universe stands to us 
in the relation of a Father — loves us and cares for us as Christianity 
asserts. So with regard to the other great Christian dogmas, im- 
mortality of soul and future state of rewards and punishments, what 
possible objection can I — who am compelled perforce to believe in the 
immortality of what we call Matter and Force, and in a very un- 
mistakable present state of rewards and punishments for our deeds — 
have to these doctrines? Give me a scintilla of evidence, and I am 
ready to jump at them." 

Of the origin of the name " agnostic " to cover this attitude, 
Huxley gave (Coll. Ess. v. pp. 237-239) the following account: — 

" When I reached intellectual maturity, and began to ask myself 
whether I was an atheist, a theist or a pantheist, a materialist or an 
idealist, a Christian or a freethinker, I found that the more I learned 
and reflected, the less ready was the answer. The one thing on which 
most of these good people were agreed was the one thing in which 
I differed from them. They were quite sure they had attained a 
certain ' gnosis ' — had more or less successfully, solved the problem 
of existence ; while I was quite sure that I had not, and had a pretty 1 
strong conviction that the problem was insoluble. This was my 
situation when I had the good fortune to find a place among the 
members of that remarkable confraternity of antagonists, the Meta- 
physical Society. Every variety of philosophical and theological 
opinion was represented there; most of my colleagues were -isls of 
one sort or another; and I, the man without a rag of a belief to cover 
himself with, could not fail to have some of the uneasy feelings which 
must have beset the historical fox when, after leaving the trap in 
which his tail remained, he presented himself to his normally elon- 
gated companions. So I took thought, andinvented what I conceived 
to be the appropriate title of ' agnostic' It came into my head 
as suggestively antithetic to the ' gnostic ' of Church history, who 
professed to know so much about the very things of which I was 
ignorant. To my great satisfaction the term took." 

This account is confirmed by R. H. Hutton, who in 1881 wrote 
that the word " was suggested by Huxley at a meeting held 
previous to the formation of the now defunct Metaphysical 
Society at Mr Knowles's house on Clapham Common in 1869, in 
my hearing. He took it from St Paul's mention of the altar to 
the Unknown God." Hutton here gives a variant etymology for 
the word, which may be therefore taken as partly derived from 
iyvoxTTOs (the "unknown" God), and partly from an antithesis 
to " gnostic "; but the meaning remains the same in either case. 
The name, as Huxley said, " took "; it was constantly used by 



Hutton in the Spectator and became a fashionable label for 
contemporary unbelief in Christian dogma. Hutton himself 
frequently misrepresented the doctrine by describing it as " belief 
in an unknown and unknowable God "; but agnosticism as 
defined by Huxley meant not belief, but absence of belief, as much 
distinct from belief on the one hand as from disbelief on the other; 
it was the half-way house between the two, where all questions 
were " open." All that Huxley asked for was evidence, either 
for or against; but this he believed it impossible to get. Occa- 
sionally he too mis-stated the meaning of the word he had 
invented, and described agnosticism as meaning "that a man 
shall not say he knows or believes , what he has no scientific 
ground for professing to know or believe." But as the late Rev* 
A. W. Momerie remarked, this would merely be " a definition 
of honesty; in that sense we ought all to be agnostics." 

Agnosticism really rests on the doctrine of the Unknowable, 
the assertion that concerning certain objects — among them the 
Deity — we never can have any " scientific " ground for belief. 
This way of solving, or passing over, the ultimate problems of 
thought has had many followers in cultured circles imbued with 
the new physical science of the day, and with disgust for the 
dogmatic creeds of contemporary orthodoxy; and its outspoken 
and even aggressive vindication by physicists of the eminence of 
Huxley had a potent influence upon the attitude taken towards 
metaphysics, and upon the form which subsequent Christian 
apologetics adopted. As a nickname the term " agnostic " was 
soon misused to cover any and every variation of scepticism, and 
just as popular preachers confused it with atheism (q.v.) in their 
denunciations, so the callow freethinker — following Tennyson's 
path of " honest doubt " — classed himself with the agnostics, 
even while he combined an instinctively Christian theism with a 
facile rejection of the historical evidences for Christianity. 

The term is now less fashionable, though the state of mind 
persists. Huxley's agnosticism was a natural consequence of 
the intellectual and philosophical conditions of the 'sixties, when 
clerical intolerance was trying to excommunicate scientific dis- 
covery because it appeared to clash, with the book of Genesis. 
But as the theory of evolution was accepted, a new spirit was 
gradually introduced into Christian theology, which has turned 
the controversies between religion and science into other channels 
and removed the temptation to flaunt a disagreement. A 
similar effect has been produced by the philosophical reaction 
against Herbert SpenCer, and by the perception that the canon? 
of evidence required in physical science must not be exalted into 
universal rules of thought. It does not follow that justification 
by faith must be eliminated in spiritual matters where sight 
cannot follow, because the physicist's duty and success He in 
pinning belief solely on verification by physical phenomena, when 
they alone are in question; and for mankind generally, though 
possibly not for an exceptional man like Huxley, an impotent 
suspension of judgment on such issues as a future life or the Being 
of God is both unsatisfying and demoralizing. 

It is impossible here to do more than indicate the path out of 
the difficulties raised by Huxley in the letter to Kingsley quoted 
above. They involve an elaborate discussion, not only of 
Christian evidences, but of the entire subject-matter alike of 
Ethics and Metaphysics, of Philosophy as a whole, and of the 
philosophies of individual writers whohave dealt in their different 
ways with the problems of existence and epistemology. It is, 
however, permissible to point out that, as has been exhaustively 
argued by Professor J. Ward in his Gifford lectures for 1896-1898 
(Naturalism and Agnosticism, 1899), Huxley's challenge ("I 
know what I mean when I say I believe in the law of the inverse 
squares, and I will not rest my life and my hopes upon weaker 
convictions ") is one which a spiritualistic philosophy need not 
shrink from accepting at the hands of naturalistic agnosticism. 
If, as Huxley admits, even putting it with unnecessary force 
against himself," the immortality of man is not half so wonderful 
as the conservation of force or the indestructibility of matter," 
the question then is, how far a critical analysis of our belief in 
the last-named doctrines will leave us in a position to regard 
them as the last stage in systematic thinking. It is the pitfall 



* 3 8o 



AGNUS DEI— AGORA 



of physical science, immersed as its students are apt to tje in 
problems dealing with tangible facts in the world of experience, 
that there is a tendency among them to claim a superior status 
of objective reality and finality for the laws to which their data 
are found to conform. But these generalizations are not ultimate 
truths, when we have to consider the nature of experience itself. 
" Because reference to the Deity will not serve for a physical 
explanation in physics, or a chemical explanation in chemistry, 
it does not therefore follow," as Professor Ward says (op. cit. 
vol. i. p. 24), " that the sum total of scientific knowledge is 
equally intelligible whether we accept the theistic hypothesis 
or not. It is true that every item of scientific knowledge is con- 
cerned with some definite relation of definite phenomena, and 
with nothing else; but, for all that, the systematic organization 
of such items may quite well yield further knowledge, which 
transcends the special relations of definite phenomena." 

At the opening of the era of modern scientific discovery, with 
all its fruitful new generalizations, the still more highly generalized 
laws of epistemology and of the spiritual constitution of man might 
well baffle the physicist and lead his intellect to " flounder." 
It is fundamentally necessary, in order to avoid such floundering, 
that the " knowledge " of things sensible should be kept distinct 
from the " knowledge " of things spiritual; yet in practice they 
are constantly confused. When the physicist limits the term 
" knowledge " to the conclusions from physical apprehensions, 
his refusal to extend it to conclusions from moral and spiritual 
apprehensions is merely the consequence of an' illegitimate 
definition. He relies on the validity of his perceptions of physical 
facts; but the saint and the theologian are no less entitled to 
rely on the validity of their moral and spiritual experiences. In 
each case the data rest on an ultimate basis, undemonstrable, 
indeed, to any one who denies them (even if he be called mad for 
doing so), except by the continuous process of working out their 
own proofs, and showing their consistency with, or necessity in, 
the scheme of things terrestrial on the one hand, or the mind 
and happiness of man on the other. The tests in each case differ; 
and it is as irrelevant for the theologian to dispute the " know- 
ledge " of the physicist, by arguments from faith and religion, 
as it is for the physicist to deny the " knowledge " of the theo- 
logian from the point of view of one who ignores the possibility 
of spiritual apprehension altogether. On the ground of secular 
history and secular evidence both might reasonably meet, as 
regards the facts, though not perhaps as to their interpretation; 
but the reason why they ultimately differ is to be found simply 
in the difference of their mental attitude towards the nature of 
" knowledge " — itself a difference of opinion as to the nature 
of man. 

In addition to the literature cited above, see L. Stephen, An 
Agnostic's Apology (1893); R. Flint, Agnosticism (1903); T. Bailey 
Saunders, The Quest of Faith, chap. ii. (1899) ; A. W. Benn, English 
Rationalism in the XlXth Century (London, 1906). (H. Ch.) 

AGNUS DEI, the figure of a lamb bearing a cross, symbolical 
of the Saviour as the " Lamb of God." The device is common 
in ecclesiastical art, but the name is especially given in the 
Church of Rome to a small cake made of the wax of the Easter 
candles and impressed with this figure. Since the gth century 
it has been customary for the popes to bless these cakes, and 
distribute them on the Sunday after Easter among the faithful, 
by whom they are highly prized as having the power to avert 
evil. In modern times the distribution has been limited to 
persons of distinction, and is made by the pope on his accession 
and every seven years thereafter. 

Agnus Dei is also the popular name for the anthem beginning 
with these words, which is said to have been introduced into 
the missal by Pope Sergius I. (687-701). Based upon John i. 29, 
the Latin form is Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccata mundi, miserere 
nobis. In the celebration of the mass it is repeated three times 
before the communion, and it is also appended to many of the 
litanies. By the judgment in the case of " Read and others v. 
The Bishop of Lincoln " it was decided in 1890 that the singing 
of the Agnus Dei in English by the choir during the administra- 
tion of the Holy Communion, provided that the reception of 



the elements be not delayed till its conclusion, is not illegal in 
the Church of England. 

For the various ceremonies in the blessing of the Agnus Dei see 
A. Vacant, Diet, de thSologie (cols. 605-613). 

AGOBARD (c. 770-840), Carolingian prelate and reformer, 
became coadjutor to Leidrad, archbishop of Lyons, in 813, and 
on the death of the latter succeeded him in the see (816). We 
know nothing of his early life nor of his descent. He pursued 
the same vigorous policy as his predecessor, who had been one 
of Charlemagne's most active agents in the reformation of the 
Church. He was strongly opposed to the schemes of the empress 
Judith for a redivision of the empire in favour of her son Charles 
the Bald, which he regarded as the cause of all the subsequent 
evils, and supported Lothair and Pippin against their father the 
emperor Louis I. Deposed in 835 by the council of Thionville, 
he made his peace with the emperor and was reinstated in 837. 
Agobard occupies an important place in the Carolingian re- 
naissance. He wrote extensively not only theological works 
but also political pamphlets and dissertations directed against 
popular superstitions. These last works are unique in the 
literature of the time. He denounced the trial by ordeal of fire 
and water, the belief in witchcraft, and the ascription of tempests 
to magic,maintainedthe Carolingian opposition to image- worship, 
but carried his logic farther and opposed the adoration of the 
saints. The basis for this crusade was theological, not scientific; 
but it reveals a clear intellect and independent judgment. In 
his purely theological works Agobard was strictly orthodox, 
except that he denied the verbal inspiration of the Scriptures. 
Agobard was reverenced as a saint in Lyons, and although his 
canonization is disputed his life is given by the Bollandists, 
Acta Sanctorum, Jun. ii. 748. 

Bibliography. — Agobard's works were lost until 1605, when a 
manuscript was discovered in Lyons and published by Papirius 
Masson, again by Baluze in 1666. For later editions see Potthast, 
Bibliotheca Historica Medii Aevi. The life of Agobard in Ebert's 
Geschichte der Litteratur des Mittelalters (1880), Band ii., is still one 
of the best to consult. For further indications see A. Molinier, 
Sources de I'histoire de France, i. p. 235. 

AGONALIA, in ancient Rome, festivals celebrated on the 
9th of January, 1 7 th of March, 2 1 st of May, and 1 1 th of December 
in each year in honour of various divinities (Ovid, Fasti, i. 
319-332). The word is derived either from agonia, " a victim," 
or from agonium, " a festival." 

AGONIC LINES (from Gr. a-, privative, and ycovla, an angle), 
the term given to the imaginary lines on the earth's surface 
connecting points at which the magnetic needle points to the 
geographical north and south. (See Magnetism, Terrestrial.) 

AGONOTHETES, in ancient Greece, the president or super- 
intendent of the sacred games. At first the person who instituted 
the games and defrayed the expenses was the Agonothetes; but 
in the great public games, such as the Olympic and Pythian, 
these presidents were the representatives of different states, or 
were chosen from the people in whose country the games were 
celebrated; thus at the Panathenaic festival at Athens ten 
athlothetae were elected for four years to superintend the various 
contests. They were variously called aiovfivrJTCu,, /Spa/Seurai, 
asywvapx<U; aycovodlicai, a.B\o6eTai (at Athens), /ia/35oCxoi or 
fiafiSovoixoi. (from the rod or sceptre emblematic of their 
authority), but their functions were generally the same. 

AGORA, originally, in primitive times, the assembly of the 
Greek people, convoked by the king or one of his nobles. The 
right of speech and vote was restricted to the nobles, the people 
being permitted to express their opinion only by signs of applause 
or disapproval. The word then came to be used for the place 
where assemblies were held, and thus from its convenience as 
a meeting-place the agora became in most of the cities of Greece 
the general resort for public and especially commercial inter- 
course, corresponding in general with the Roman forum. At 
Athens, with the increase of commerce and political interest, it 
was found advisable to call public meetings at the Pnyx or the 
temple of Dionysus; but the important assemblies, such as 
meetings for ostracism, were held in the agora. In the best days 
of Greece the agora was the place where nearly all public traffic 



AGORACRITUS— AGRA 



38i 



was conducted. It was most frequented in the forenoon, and then 
only by men. Slaves did the greater part of the purchasing, 
though even the noblest citizens of Athens did not scruple to 
buy and sell there. Citizens were allowed a free market; 
foreigners and metics had to pay a toll. Public festivals also 
were celebrated in the open area of the agora. At Athens the 
agora of classical times was adorned with trees planted by Cimon; 
around it" numerous public buildings were erected, such as the 
council chamber and the law courts (for its topography, see 
Athens). Pausanias (especially vi. 24) is the great architectural 
authority on the agorae of various Greek cities, and details are 
also given by Vitruvius (v. 1). 

AGORACRITUS, a Parian and Athenian sculptor of the age 
of Phidias, and said to have been his favourite pupil. His most 
noted work was the statue at Rhamnus of Nemesis, by some 
attributed to Phidias himself. Of this statue part of the head 
is in the British Museum; some fragments of the reliefs which 
adorned the pedestal are in the museum at Athens. 

AGORANOMI, magistrates in the republics of Greece, whose 
position and duties were in many respects similar to those of the 
aediles of Rome. In Athens there were ten, chosen annually by 
lot, five of whom took charge of the city and five of the Peiraeus. 
They maintained order in the markets, settled disputes, examined 
the quality of the articles exposed for sale, tested weights and 
measures, collected the harbour dues and enforced the shipping 
regulations. 

AGORDAT, a town of Eritrea, N.E. Africa, on the route 
between Massawa and Kassala. At Agordat on the 21st of 
December 1893 the Italian troops under Colonel Arimondi 
inflicted a severe defeat on the followers of the khalifa. Agordat 
is protected by a strong fort. (See Eritrea and Sudan, History.) 

AGOSTINI, LEONARDO, Italian antiquary of the. 17th cen- 
tury, was born at Siena. After being employed for some time 
to collect works of art for the Barberini palace, he was appointed 
by Pope Alexander VII. superintendent of antiquities in the 
Roman states. He issued a new edition of Paruta's Sicilian 
Medals, with engravings of 400 additional specimens; and in 
conjunction with Giovanni Bellori (1615-1606) he also published 
a work on antique sculptured gems, which was translated into 
Latin by Jakob Gronovius (Amsterdam, 1685). 

AGOSTINO, or Agostini [Augustinus], PAOLO (1393-1629), 
Italian musician, was born at Valerano, and studied under 
G. B. Nanini, as we learn from the dedication in the third and 
fourth books of his masses, subsequently becoming the son-in- 
iaw of his master. He succeeded Ugolini as conductor of the 
pope's orchestra in St. Peter's. His musical compositions are 
numerous and of great merit, an Agnus Dei for eight voices being 
specially admired. 

AGOSTINO and AGNOLO (or Angelo) DA SIENA, Italian 
architects and sculptors in the first half of the 14th century. 
Delia Valle and other commentators deny that they were 
brothers. They certainly studied together under Giovanni 
Pisano, and in 13 17 were jointly appointed architects of thftir 
native town, for which they designed the Porto Romana, the 
church and convent of St Francis, and other buildings. On the 
recommendation of the celebrated Giotto, who styled them the 
best sculptors of the time, they executed in 1330 the tomb of 
Bishop Guido Tarlati in the cathedral of Arezzo, which Giotto 
had designed. It was esteemed one of the finest artistic works 
of the 14th century, but unfortunately was destroyed by the 
French under the duke of Anjou. 

AGOULT, MARIE CATHERINE SOPHIE DE FLAVIGNY, 
Comtesse d'(i8o5-i876), French author, whose nomde plume was 
" Daniel Stern," was born at Frankfort-on-Main on the 31st of 
December 1805. Her father was a French officer who had served 
in the army of the emigrant princes, and her mother was the 
daughter of a Frankfort banker. She was married in 1827 to the 
comte Charles d'Agoult. In Paris she gathered round her a 
brilliant society which included Alfred de Vigny, Sainte-Beuve, 
Ingres, Chopin, Meyerbeer, Heine and others. She was separated 
from her husband, and became the mistress of Franz Liszt. 
During her frequent travels in Switzerland, France and Italy she 



made the acquaintance* of George Sand, and figures in the Lettres 
d'un voyageur as " Arabella." By Liszt she had three children — 
a son who died young; Blandine, who married M. Emile Ollivier; 
and Cosima, who married first Hans von Bulow and later Richard 
Wagner. The story of her breach with Liszt is told under a very 
slight disguise in her novel NMida (1845). On her return to Paris 
in 1 84 1 she began to write art criticisms for the Presse, and in 
1844 she contributed to the Revue des deux Mondes articles on 
B ettina von Arnim and on Heinrich Heine , but her views were not 
acceptable to the editor, and Daniel Stern withdrew to become a 
contributor to the Revue independante. Mme. d'Agoult was an 
ardent apostle of the ideas of '48, and from this date her salon, 
which had been literary and artistic, took on a more political 
tone; revolutionists of various nationalities were welcomed by 
her, and she had an especial friendship and sympathy for Daniele 
Manin. In 1857 she produced a national drama, Jeanne Dare, 
which was translated into Italian and presented with brilliant 
success at Turin. The most important section of Daniel Stern's 
work is her political and historical essays: Lettres rtpubUcaines 
(1848), Esquisses morales et politiques (1849), Histoire de la Re- 
volution de 1848 (3 vols., 1850-1853), Histoire des commencements 
de la RSpublique aux Pays-Bas (1872). Mme. d'Agoult died in 
Paris on the 5th of March 1876. Her daughter Claire Christine 
(b. 1830), who married Guy de Charnace, is known as a writer. 

See Mme. d'Agoult, Mes Souvenirs (1806-1833), 1877; A. Cuvillier 
Fleury, Portraits rhiolutionnaires, vol. i. (1889) ; J. Mazzini, Lettres 
de Joseph Mazzini a Daniel Stern (1872); A. Pommier, Madame la 
comtesse d' Agoult (Daniel Stern), 1876; A. Ungherini, " Daniel Stern" 
in the Revista repubblicana (1880, No. 9) ; S. Rocheblave, line Amitii 
ramanesgue, George Sand et Madame d Agoult (1895). 

AGOUTI, or Aguti, the West Indian name of Dasyprocta aguli, 
a terrestrial rodent of the size of a rabbit, common to Trinidad 
and Guiana, and classed in the family Caviidae. Under the same 
term may be included the other species of Dasyprocta, of which 
there are about half a score in tropical America. Agoutis are 
slender-limbed rodents, with five front and three hind toes (the 
first front toe very minute), and very short tails. The hair, 
especially on the hind-quarters, is coarse and somewhat rough; 
the colour being generally rufous brown. The molar teeth have 
cylindrical crowns, with several islands and a single lateral fold of 
enamel when worn. In habits agoutis are nocturnal, dwelling in 
forests, where they conceal themselves during the day in hollow 
tree-trunks, or in burrows among roots. Active and graceful in 
their movements, their pace is either a kind of trot or a series of 
springs following one another so rapidly as to look like a gallop. 
They take readily to water, in which they swim well. Their food 
comprises leaves, roots, nuts and other fruits. They do much 
harm to plantations of sugar-cane and bananas. In captivity the 
females produce only one or two young at a birth. 

AGRA, an ancient city of India, which gives its name to a 
district and division in the United Provinces. It is famous for 
containing the most perfect specimens of Mogul architecture. 
Agra, like Delhi, owes much of its importance in both historical 
and modern times to the commercial and strategical advantages 
of its position. The river Jumna, which washes the walls of 
its fort, was the natural highway for the traffic of the rich delta 
of Bengal to the heart of India, and it formed, moreover, from 
very ancient times, the frontier defence of the Aryan stock settled 
in the plain between the Ganges and the Jumna against their 
western neighbours, hereditary freebooters who occupied the 
highlands of Central India. No place was better fitted for both an 
emporium and a frontier fortress. The river formed an unf ordable 
barrier and also a useful means of communication. Jehangir tells 
us in his autobiography that before his father Akbar built the 
present fort, the town was defended by a citadel of great antiquity. 
For three hundred years the Afghans and other tribes came down 
from the north and founded kingdoms; and their power radiated 
from Delhi and Agra. It was Sikandar, of the house of Lodi 
(a.d. 1500), the last of the Afghan dynasties, who realized the 
strategic importance of Agra as a point for keeping in check his 
rebellious vassals to the. south. He removed his court there, and 
Agra from being " a mere village of old standing," says a Persian 
chronicler, became the capital of a kingdom. In 1 5 2 6 the city was 



3 82 



AGRA CANAL— AGRAPHA 



Taj 
Mahal. 



captured by the emperor Baber, the famous Koh-i-noor diamond 
being part of the loot; and it was here that Baber announced 
that his invasion was to be a permanent conquest, aDd not a mere 
temporary inroad. It was Saber's grandson Akbar that built the 
present fort, whose strong and lofty walls of red sandstone are a 
mile and a. half in circumference. The building was completed in 
1665, when Charles II. was on the throne of England and the 
plague was devastating London. Another building of much the 
same date is the red stone palace generally attributed to Akbar, 
but probably of an earlier time, which is the finest example of 
pure Hindu architecture; while the Moti Masjid, or Pearl Mosque, 
is an equally perfect example of the Mahommedan style. 

But the glory of Agra, the most splendidly poetic building in 
the world, is the Taj Mahal, the mausoleum built (a.d. 1632) by 
the emperor Shah Jahan for the remains of his 
favourite wife, Mumtaz Mahal, in which he himself also 
lies buried. The building is built of white marble 
throughout, crowned with a great white dome in the centre, and 
with a smaller dome at each of its four corners. From the marble 
terrace which surrounds it rise four tall minarets of the same 
material, one at each corner. The Taj has been modelled and 
painted more frequently than any other building in the world, and 
the word pictures of it are numberless. But it can only be 
described as a dream in marble. It amply justifies the saying 
that the Moguls designed like Titans and finished like jewellers. 
In regard to colour and design the Taj ranks first in the world for 
purely decorative workmanship; while the perfect symmetry of 
its exterior once seen can never be forgotten, nor the aerial grace 
of its domes, rising like marble bubbles into the azure sky. In his 
History of Architecture, Fergusson says of it:— 

" This building is an early example of that system of inlaying with 
precious stones which became the great characteristic of the style 
of the Moghals after the death of Akbar. All the spandrils of the 
Taj, all the angles and more important architectural details, are 
heightened by being inlaid with precious stones such as agates, 
bloodstones, jaspers and the like. These are combined in wreaths, 
scrolls and frets, as exquisite in design as they are beautiful in colour, 
and relieved by the pure white marble in which they are inlaid, they 
form the most beautiful and precious style of ornament ever adopted 
in architecture. It is lavishly bestowed on the tombs themselves 
and the screens which surround them, but more sparingly introduced 
on the mosque that forms one wing of the Taj, and on the fountains 
and surrounding buildings. The judgment, indeed, with which this 
style of ornament is apportioned to the various parts, is almost as 
remarkable as the ornament itself, and conveys a high idea of the 
taste and skill of the architects of this age." 

Of the Taj as a whole Lord Roberts says in his Forty-one 
Years in India: — 

" Neither words nor pencil could give to the most imaginative 
reader the slightest idea of the all-satisfying beauty and purity of 
this glorious conception. To those who have not already seen it I 
would say, ' Go to India. The Taj alone is well worth the journey.' " 

The Taj was designed by Ustad Isa, variously described as a 
Byzantine Turk and a native of Shiraz in Persia. The pielra 
dura work belongs to the Persian school; and the common 
belief that it was designed by Austin ,de Bordeaux, a French 
architect in the service of Shah Jahan, is probably incorrect. 

Agra was formerly the capital of the North-West Provinces, but 
after the Mutiny the seat of government was removed to Alla- 
habad. Situated 841 m. from Calcutta it is now an important 
railway centre, whence two main lines diverge southwards 
towards Bombay. In 1901 the population was 188,022, showing 
an increase of 1 2 % during the decade. The city contains cotton 
mills, factories for ginning and pressing cotton, a tannery and 
boot factory and flour mill. There are also two missionary 
colleges. 

The district of Agra has an area of 1856 sq. m. Its 
general appearance is that common to the Doab, a level plain 
intersected by watercourses and ravines. Its general elevation 
is estimated at from 650 to 700 ft. above the level of the sea. The 
district is intersected by the Jumna, and is also watered by the 
Agra canal. The principal crops are millets, pulses, barley, 
wheat, cotton and a little indigo. The population in 1 001 was 
1,060,528, showing an increase of 6 % during the decade. . 

The division of Agra has an area of 10,154 sq. m. In 



1901 the population was 5,249,542, showing an increase of 10% 
during the decade, attributed to the extension of irrigation from 
canals. It comprises the six districts of Muttra, Agra, Farukh- 
abad, Mainpuri, Etawah and Etah. 

For an account of the architecture of Agra see Fergusson's History 
of Architecture; Cities of India (1903), by G. W. Forrest; Enchanted 
India (1899), by Prince Bojidar Karageorgevitch ; and E. B. Havell, 
Handbook to Agra and the Taj (1904). (C. L.) 

AGRA CANAL, an important Indian irrigation work, available 
also for navigation, in Delhi, Gurgaon, Muttra and Agra districts, 
and Bharatpur state. The canal receives its water from the 
Jumna river at Okla, about 10 m. below Delhi. The weir across 
the Jumna was the first attempted in Upper India upon a founda- 
tion of fine sand; it is about 800 yds. long, and rises 7 ft. above 
the summer level of the river. From Okla the canal follows the 
high land between the Khari-nadi and the Jumna, and finally 
joins the Banganga river about 20 m. below Agra. Navigable 
branches connect the canal with Muttra and Agra. It was 
opened in 1874. 

AGRAM (Hungarian Zdgrdb, Croatian Zagreb) , the capital of 
Croatia-Slavonia, and a royal free town of Hungary; pleas- 
antly situated between the north bank of the Save and the 
mountains which culminate in Sljeme (3396 ft.); 187 m. by 
rail S. of Vienna. Pop. (1890) 38,742; (1900) 57,930, or with 
garrison 61,002. Agram is the seat of the ban, or viceroy, of 
Croatia-Slavonia, of the Banal and Septemviral courts, the 
highest in the land, and of a chamber of commerce.' It is also 
the meeting-place of the parliament; but local affairs are con- 
ducted by a municipal council. The city is divided into three 
districts. The Kapitel-Stadt, sometimes called the Bishop's 
Town, with the palace of the Roman Catholic archbishop, and his 
late Gothic cathedral, dating from the 15th century, lies eastward 
of the Medvesfiak, a brook which flows into the Save. The Upper 
Town, on high ground west of the Medvesdak, contains the 
palace of the ban and the natural history museum. On the 
south, the Lower Town is separated from the other districts by 
the Ilica, a long street traversed by a cable tramway. In it are 
the business and industrial quarters; the palace of justice; the 
academy of science, with picture-galleries, a library and a 
collection of antiquities; the theatre; the Franz Josef Univer- 
sity, founded in 1874 to teach theology, law and philosophy; 
the synagogue; and the only Protestant church existing in 
the country at the beginning of the 20th century. Roman 
Catholic churches and schools are numerous. Besides the large 
Maximir park and botanical gardens, many of the squares are 
planted with trees and adorned with statues; while the whole 
city is surrounded by vineyards and country houses. Tobacco, 
leather, linen, carpets and war-material are manufactured in 
Agram, which also contains the works of the Hungarian state 
railways, and has a brisk trade in grain, wine, potash, honey, 
silk and porcelain. 

In 1094 Agram was founded by Ladislaus I. of Hungary, as 
the seat of a bishop; and on the expulsion of its Mongol colony, 
in 1242, it was raised to the rank of a royal free city. For cen- 
turies a bitter feud raged between the Kapitel-Stadt and the 
Upper Town, until these rivals were forced to join hands against 
the Turks. Agram, already the political centre of Croatia-- 
Slavonia, was selected as the capital in 1867. It suffered severely 
from earthquake in 1880 and 1,901. 

AGRAPHA (i.e. "unwritten"), the name given to certain 
utterances ascribed, with some degree of certainty, to Jesus, 
which have been preserved in documents other than the Gospels, 
e.g. Acts xx. 35; 1 Tim. v. 18; 1 Cor. vii. 10-12, and the Logia 
(q.v.) discovered in 1897 and 1903 at Oxyrhyncus. Two inter- 
esting examples of such sayings may be quoted: (1) " That 
which is weak shall be saved by that which- is strong"; (2) 
" Jesus, on whom be peace, has said: 'The world is merely a 
bridge; ye are to pass over it, and not to build your dwellings 
upon it.' " The first of these is from the Apostolic Canons 
(c. A.d. 300), the second was found by the missionary Alexander 
Duff inscribed in Arabic on the gateway of the mosque at Fateh- 
pur Sikri. 



AGRARIAN LAWS 



383 



The earliest modern collection of such sayings was by Cotelerius, 
Ecclesiae Graecae Monumenta (1677-1688), followed by J. E. Grabe, 
Spicelegium (1698 and 1700), and J. B. Fabricius, Codex Apocryph. 
N. T. (2nd ed., 1719). See also A. Resch, Agrapha (Leipzig, 1889) ; 
J. H. Ropes, Die Sprilche Jesu (Leipzig, 1896) ; and the article 
" Sayings " in J. Hastings' Dictionary of Christ and the Gospels. 

AGRARIAN LAWS (Lat. ager, land). Under this heading 
we deal with the disposal of the public land {ager publicus) of 
ancient Rome. It was a principle of the Republican constitution 
that no gratuitous disposition of state property should be made 
without the consent of the people. Hence many of the ordinances 
affecting the public land were laws (leges) in the strictest sense of 
that word. It is, however, both justifiable and convenient to 
consider in this article all the regulations that were made for the 
administration of the public land by the executive authorities, 
as well as by the people during the Republic, and by the com- 
mands of the emperor, which had the force of law during the 
Principate. 

The existence of public land, first in Italy, and then in the 
Mediterranean world, was the outcome of two ideas which are 
very familiar to students of antiquity. This land was the prize 
of conquest and was one of the means of defraying the current 
expenses of state-administration. For the latter purpose land 
is often leased or allowed to be occupied on the condition of the 
payment of dues. But it may be made to fufil another purpose 
as well — this purpose being the satisfaction of the individual 
needs of poorer citizens. To meet this object the land is usually 
assigned, and on assignment generally ceases to be the property 
of the state. But it often happens that the state is not wholly 
disinterested in undertaking such acts of assignment. It gains 
security and territorial control by planting garrisons in conquered 
country, and it relieves itself of the necessity of providing for 
its poorer classes whether by state-aid or by a hazardous tamper- 
ing with the rights of private property. In this use to which 
public land could be turned we see at once the connexion 
between agrarian legislation and colonization — a connexion 
which was so close that when a Roman spoke of an agrarian law 
he seems generally to have understood by it a law establishing 
a colony — and also the two aspects of colonization, the military 
and the social. These two objects were indissolubly connected 
throughout the whole of the earlier period of Roman agrarian 
assignation. They only became separated in the period subse- 
quent to the Gracchi in so far as social motives still continued 
to be operative when military precautions had ceased to be 
necessary. It is probable that one of the chief motives which 
prompted infant Rome to war with her neighbours was the 
land-hunger of her citizens. This hunger she satisfied after 
conquest by annexing a portion of the enemy's territory. The 
amount thus confiscated varied from time to time. It was 
usually a third, but sometimes a half or even two-thirds, and 
after the fall of Capua in the Second Punic War the whole terri- 
tory of the state was annexed. It is possible that by the close 
of the 2nd century B.C. one-half of the land of Italy belonged 
to Rome whether in private ownership or as the property of the 
state. Annexation was carried on in the provinces on a relatively 
smaller scale: but Rome retained as domain-land much of the 
territory of communities which had been destroyed, such as 
Carthage and Corinth, and the estates of former kings, such as 
the lands of the Attalids in the Chersonese. Other domains in 
Sicily and Greece, such as the territory of Leontini in the former, 
or Oropus in the latter case, are also found. This peculiar prop- 
erty of the Roman state in the provinces must be carefully 
distinguished from the general overlordship which Rome was 
supposed to hold over all provincial soil, expressed in the state- 
ment that provincials had only possession or usufruct of their 
land (Gaius ii. 7; Gromatici, p. 36, Lachmann). This overlord- 
ship was probably merely a legal fiction by which the juristic 
mind assigned a reason for the fact that the provincials paid a 
land tax from which Italians fcere exempt. 

Such portions of the territories of conquered cities as were 
not claimed by Rome were as a matter of course left in the un- 
disturbed possession of these cities. If the city was a federate 
state (civiias foederata) his possession was guaranteed by a treaty ; 



if it was a free city, the guarantee was made by charter; if it 
was neither federate nor free, the abandonment of the territory 
by Rome must have been taken as a sufficient guarantee of the 
city's right to possess, although statements relative to the sur- 
render may have been contained in the charter of the province 
(lex provinciae) to which the city belonged. But, whether the 
states were federate, free or stipendiary, there was only one case 
in which it was important to specify precisely that land had 
been restored (redditus) to its former occupants. This was the 
case where Rome had marked out a territory for assignment to 
her own citizens, but where in or near the limits of the assignment 
some of the land had been left in the hands of its former pro- 
prietors. Such land was noted in the state registers as redditus 
veteri possessori. Sometimes it was found that such an ancient 
possessor owned pieces of land separated from one another. In 
such cases an exchange might be effected between him and some 
other possessor, so that his possessions might be continuous. 
The fact of such an exchange was symbolized in the registers 
by the entry of land redditus et commutatus pro suo. 

When the claims of earlier owners had been satisfied, the 
state proceeded to deal with such land as it retained. It dealt 
with it in two ways. It either alienated it, whether in exchange 
for a price or gratuitously; or it kept it as a source of revenue, 
whether on a system of lease or on some system of remunerative 
occupation. We may first consider the cases in which the state 
decided to alienate. The land might be sold for the benefit of 
the treasury. Typical instances of this treatment are furnished 
by the sale of some Campanian land during the Second Punic War 
(Livy xxviii. 46, xxxii. 7). The censors may have directed the 
sale, but it was executed by the quaestors as the regular officials 
of the treasury. Hence such land was described as ager quaes- 
torius. The land was sold in definitely marked out plots, and 
we must suppose that, as a rule, when this sale had been effected, 
the lots fell under the absolute ownership of their purchasers. 
Yet there was some period of Roman history when this ownership 
was (at least in certain cases) conditioned. The Roman writers 
on agriculture speak of conditions and their neglect (Gromatici, 
p. 115). The conditions were probably those of military service 
or frontier defence. The epoch of history at which this con- 
ditioned ownership was recognized cannot be determined. It 
is a form of tenure that would be equally appropriate to the 
needs of the earliest period of Roman history and to those of 
imperial times. 

The second mode of alienation was that by assignation. Lands 
thus assigned were known as agri dati assignati. The gift on 
the part of the state was gratuitous, and ownership passed wholly 
to the assignee. The land so given was definitely surveyed, 
marked out and registered. Such an assignment might take 
one of two possible forms. It might be the means of establishing 
a new " plantation " (colonia), with some independent political 
organization of its own, however slight — a settlement, therefore, 
which could be thought of as an entity separate from the city 
of Rome and from any other municipality. Or it might be the 
means of providing allotments for individuals who remained 
domiciled at Rome or continued to be members of some already 
existing municipality. It has been frequently held in modern 
times that this latter method of assignment is the one which 
our ancient authorities describe as assignment to individuals 
(viritim), and that the antithesis lies between the " colonial " 
and the " viritane " method of distribution. It is true that the 
passages which speak of the latter mode of assignation need not, 
and perhaps cannot, be interpreted as presenting the antithesis 
(Varro, de Re Rustica, i. 2. 7, i. 10. 2; Livy iv. 48, v. 24; 
Festus, p. 373; Gromatici, pp. 154, 160); yet it is not improb- 
able that the antithesis is latent in this specific use of the term. 
It seems clear that the idea of assignation to, and, therefore, 
of ownership by, individuals must originally have been developed 
in contrast to the idea of ownership by some larger group (see 
Roman Law). When the stage of individual ownership was 
reached, all assignation was " viritane," but only .some assigna- 
tion was " colonial." " Viritane " was, therefore, the wider 
term which would cover, and may sometimes have been used 



384 



AGRARIAN LAWS 



specially to denote, the system of non-colonial assignment. The 
amount granted to individuals in assignments of both types 
varied from time to time. It was reckoned in terms of the 
jugerum, which was approximately f of an English acre. The 
earliest and smallest assignment was 2 jugera — an amount so 
small that it seems to presuppose on the part of the recipient 
some share in common or gentile property or some additional 
private property of his own. Other quotas were 3, 3^, 7, 10+14 
jugera. The last was the maximum amount granted before the 
time of Ti. Gracchus (133 B.C.), and it was held by representatives 
of the old school that 7 jugera were as much as any frugal Roman 
should want (Pliny, Historia Naturalis, xviii. 18). The division 
was carried out by commissions of 3, 5 or 10 men appointed by 
the people (Cicero, de Lege Agraria ii. 7. 17). The land which 
the state retained as ager publicus was always placed in the hands 
of individuals, who occupied it in some manner remunerative 
to the state. These individuals (possessores) were never regarded 
as owners of the land thus occupied. It remained the property 
of the state, was held without a contract (precario) and could 
be resumed by the state at will. But though the possessors 
had no claim against the state, their ownership could be defended 
against all other individual claimants; and it seems probable 
that from an early date the praetor's possessory interdict was 
used to protect all occupiers, provided their tenure had been 
acquired neither by force (vi) nor by seizure of land in its occupiers' 
absence (clam), nor by mere permission of the previous holder 
to occupy (precario alter ab alter 0). Moreover, Appian says that 
possessors of this type could transfer their land by inheritance, 
and that the land was accepted as security by creditors. This 
kind of occupation, therefore, though clearly distinguished from 
ownership (dominium), was yet regarded as a perfectly secure 
form of tenure. All occupiers of public land paid dues to the 
state through a state contractor (publicanus) . These dues 
varied in amount, and in the method of their collection. We 
learn from Appian that the ordinary dues paid by occupiers of 
arable land in Italy were ^ of seed crops and £ of plant produce. 
Owners who turned cattle or sheep on pasture land belonging 
to the state also paid fixed dues to the treasury. The occupiers 
of the Roman public land in Campania paid a large rent (Cic. 
de leg. Agr. i. 7. 21). Appian's account of the public land (Bell. 
Civ. i. 7) would lead us to suppose that the amount of tax paid 
by the occupier, and the method adopted by the state for the 
collection of the revenues, depended upon the nature of the land 
at the time when it first passed to a possessor. He says that 
some of the public land which was in a good state of cultivation 
was let on lease; but that with regard to the poor or devastated 
land proclamation was made that anyone might squat on it 
and till it in return for the small payment in kind mentioned 
above. It has been questioned whether the land described by 
Appian and by Cicero as let on lease, of which the Campanian 
land and some lands in Sicily are typical, represents a legally 
distinct class. It seems probable that the distinction is one of 
practice rather than of law, and that the difference lay not in 
the relation between the state and the possessor (as would be 
the case if the leased land were really let to individuals by the 
censor, while the occupied land was held by mere permission of 
the state without any contract) but in the details of the contract 
between the censor and the publicanus with regard to the collec- 
tion of the dues. The conditions of the tenure of the Roman 
public land in Africa are known to us from the Lex Agraria of 
in B.C. (Bruns, Fontes, i. 3. n, vv. 85 foil.). Here the publicanus 
is the middleman between the state and the possessor, and 
purchases from the censor the right of collecting dues. The 
law places no restriction on bargaining between the censor and 
the publicanus, but enacts that no possessor or pastor shall ever 
be required by the publicanus to pay more than the amount 
prescribed by the censors of 115 B.C. These conditions may be 
regarded as typical for the occupation of public lands. And 
when Cicero speaks of public land as let on lease (locaius) by 
the censor, he no doubt refers to the farming of the taxes to a 
publicanus for a fixed period, and not to the letting of the land. 
This seems clear from a passage (in Verr. iii. 6. 12) where he 



speaks of land in Sicily which had been restored by Rome to 
former owners as being leased. The land itself could not be 
leased by Rome if it belonged not to Rome but to the Sicilian 
inhabitants; but the collection of the revenues due to Rome 
could be so leased to Publicani (q.v.) . And the same explanation 
would apply to Cicero's statements that the Campanian land 
was let on lease by the censors (cf. Festus, s.v. venditiones) . The 
view that there was a distinct class of the public land which was 
let out for a fixed teim of years to tenants on a definite lease, 
unlike the ordinary public land which was always held in occupa- 
tion merely at will (precario), has been maintained by W. A. 
Becker, and seems to be supported, with the help of conjecture, 
by a few passages in Cicero and by Hyginus (Gromatici, p. 116). 
But the passage of Hyginus is barely intelligible even on this 
supposition; and Cicero's repeated statement that the Campanian 
land was expressly exempted from the legislation of the Gracchi 
(cf. Lex Agraria, Bruns, loc. cit. v. 6) shows that there was not 
sufficient distinction between the Campanian tenure and that 
of other public land in Italy to make this definite exception 
by name superfluous. The Sempronian law could obviously 
not touch land which the state had leased to occupiers on the 
basis of a definite contract. Moreover, we have absolutely no 
evidence for such a contract, even in Cicero's speeches against 
Rullus, when he might be expected to mention it as an objection 
to Rullus's bill. That there were some distinctive characteristics 
about the tenure of certain lands, of which the Campanian land 
is typical, seems proved by the repeated association of these 
lands with certain special lands in the provinces, especially at 
Leontini in Sicily, and by some passages in the Gromatici where 
agri vectigales are spoken of as a distinct class. But what these 
characteristics were cannot be clearly determined. It seems 
certain that in every case the possessor occupied precario, and 
that only in the bargain between the censor and the middleman 
was there room for contract. Thus the state was justified in 
the claim to resume public land which it made in many of the 
Agrarian laws. 

The earliest agrarian measures of which we have any record 
are the distributions of land conquered in war to poor citizens, 
which later authorities attribute to Numa and Seirvius Tullius. 
Such assignments, however, are not the result of legislative acts, 
but of a voluntary surrender on the king's part of his own 
portion of the spoils. It is probable that the agrarian law which 
resulted from the proposals of Spurius Cassius (consul 486 B.C.) 
was the first attempt made by the Roman people to exercise its 
control over the occupation of state territory. According to 
the traditional account, Cassius proposed that such portion oi 
lands lately conquered from the Hernici as fell to the Roman 
state should be divided in equal shares between the Roman 
plebs and the Latins; and further that poor citizens should 
receive allotments of land previously conquered, and occupied 
without any legal right by the Patricians. The inclusion of 
the Latins in the distribution was afterwards dropped; but the 
law in its final form certainly asserted the right of the Plebeians 
to take their share in the public land. The accounts given of it 
by Livy and Dionysius are no doubt coloured by their know- 
ledge of later agrarian legislation, and it seems hardly likely 
that the proposal to resume and redistribute public land already 
occupied was made at this early stage; but it probably challenged 
the exclusive claim of Patricians to occupy. We hear of another 
agrarian- law proposed by the tribune Lucius Icilius in 456 B.C. 
(Lex Icilia de Aventino publicando) which regulated in some way 
the tenure of public land on the Aventine. In 376 B.C. the 
tribunes Licinius and Sextius introduced into their laws, for 
the promotion of the privileges of the plebs, a clause enacting 
that no more than 500 jugera of land should be occupied by a 
single cultivator. It seems almost certain from Livy's account 
that this measure referred only to the occupation of ager publicus, 
though some modern authorities have upheld the view that it 
dealt with land held on any kind of tenure, others again that it 
dealt only with private property in land. According to Appian, 
the law also enacted that only 100 cattle and 500 sheep might 
be turned by one owner on the public pastures. But it failed 



AGREDA 



385 



of its object because it did not provide any adequate machinery 
for the resumption by the state of land held in excess of the 
prescribed amount, and was therefore easily evaded. The next 
agrarian law we hear of was a more special measure dealing with 
lands conquered from the Senones and Picentines. In 232 B.C. 
C. Flaminius, then tribune of the plebs, proposed to resume 
these lands for the state, although they were already occupied 
by large landholders, and to distribute them in allotments to poor 
citizens. The measure met with much opposition from the richer 
classes, and did not gain the sanction of the senate; but 
C. Flaminius ignored constitutional usage and brought it direct 
before the council of the plebs, by which it was made law. In 
133 B.C. the tribune Tiberius Gracchus (q.v.) re-enacted the 
earlier measure of Licinius and Sextius, with the additional 
provisions that each owner might occupy 2 50 jugera for each 
son, in addition to the original 500, and that a commission of 
three (Hi. viri agris dandis adsignandis) should be appointed to 
carry out the terms of the law. He also enacted that the land 
occupied in excess of the prescribed amount, and on that account 
resumed for the state by the land commission, should be dis- 
tributed in inalienable lots to poor citizens. Subsequent modi- 
fications of those provisions which dealt with the powers of 
the land commission led to a re-enactment of the whole by 
C. Gracchus, the brother of Tiberius, tribune in 123 B.C. But 
within 1 5 years from the tribunate of C. Gracchus the whole 
of his law had been rendered null by three further enactments. 
The first of these permitted the sale of land allotted under the 
law, which thus tended to return into the hands of its former 
occupiers as private property, which the state had no longer 
any right to resume. The second abolished the commission 
appointed to carry out the terms of the law, thus putting a stop 
to further resumption and distribution, and also transformed 
existing occupiers into owners of the land they occupied, paying 
only a small due to the treasury. The third (probably the sur- 
viving Lex Agraria, Bruns, loc. cit.) abolished the payment. This 
law belongs to the year in B.C. The dates of the two former 
laws are uncertain, but it is probable that the first was passed in 
121, the second in 119 or 118. From this time forward a 
change comes over land legislation. The ordinary public land 
in Italy, in the hands of occupiers, which had given rise to all 
the agrarian legislation between 376 and in, had practically 
ceased to exist. The Campanian land still remained, but the 
same reasons which led to its exemption from the Gracchan 
legislation seem to have continued to protect its holders until 
63 B.C. In the meantime several agrarian laws were passed 
which provided for the distribution of land placed in some other 
way at the disposal of the state. In 100 B.C. Appuleius Satur- 
ninus (q.v.), tribune of the plebs, proposed the allotment of lands 
recently taken from the Cimbri in Gaul. This law was passed, 
but eventually declared null by the senate, with the rest of 
Saturninus's laws. A more dangerous precedent was set by 
Sulla in his dictatorship (82-81 B.C.). He was the first to con- 
fiscate the lands of his political foes, and of communities which 
had resisted him, and treating them as ager publicus, assign 
them to his veterans as a prize. This example was followed by 
Octavian (Augustus) and Antony (M. Antonius) after their 
proscriptions in 43 B.C. A third method of providing land for 
distribution was that adopted by Servilius Rullus (q.v.) in 
63 B.C. His bill enacted that land should be purchased in Italy 
with money gained by the sale of Roman territories abroad, and 
allotted to citizens. A commission of ten (x. viri agris dandis 
adsignandis) , annually elected by 9 out of the 35 tribes, was to 
carry out the terms of the law. Rullus also ventured to propose 
the distribution of the Campanian land, which had hitherto 
been respected by all agrarian reformers. It was chiefly on this 
ground that Cicero in his three speeches on the Agrarian law 
succeeded in exciting such a general feeling against it that it was 
eventually withdrawn. In 60 B.C. the tribune L; Flavius brought 
forward a bill for the distribution of lands to Pompey's veterans. 
The Campanian land was certainly to be included in the dis- 
tribution, and it is clear from Cicero that the bill in some way 
dealt violently with the rights of private owners. It also, how- 
US 



ever, enacted that land should be purchased by the state with 
the wealth which Pompey's conquests had brought into the 
treasury. The last proposal was supported by Cicero, but the 
bill seems to have been dropped, only to reappear in more 
moderate form in the following year. A consular bill, the lex 
Julia Campana, was passed by Julius Caesar in 59 B.C., which 
provided for the settlement of Pompey's veterans on the Cam- 
panian land, and other lands purchased by the state from private 
owners in Italy with the full consent of the latter. In its 
original form, the bill omitted all reference to the Campanian 
land, which seems to have been included by Caesar in the dis- 
tribution only when the continued and unreasoning opposition 
of the senate had goaded him to extreme measures. A commission 
of twenty was to be appointed to carry out the law, from which 
Caesar himself was expressly excluded. This measure finally 
settled the question of the Campanian land, which now passed 
out of the category of ager publicus. The last agrarian law of 
the republic was that passed in 44 B.C. on the proposal of the 
consul M. Antonius, or of his brother L. Antonius. We have 
no detailed account of the measure, but it seems to have pro- 
vided grants of land for veterans, and was to be administered by 
seven commissioners. The law was afterwards cancelled by decree 
of the senate, probably on the ground of some technical flaw. 
The emperor Vespasian attempted to reclaim for the state small 
oddments of land (subseciva) which were held by neighbouring 
owners to whom they had never been definitely assigned. The 
attempt met with violent opposition, and though resumed by 
Titus, was finally crushed by Domitian, who issued an edict re- 
cognizing all oddments of land thus held to be private property. 

Authorities. — Niebuhr, History of Rome (English translation), 
ii. p. 129 foil. (Cambridge, 1832); B'ecker, Handbuch der rbmischen 
Alterthiimer, iii. 2, p. 142 (Leipzig, 1843); Marquardt, Romische 
Staatsvenvaltung, i. p. 96 foil. (Leipzig, 1881); Madvig, Verjassung 
und Verwaltung des romischen Staates, ii. p. 364 foil. (Leipzig, 1882), 
(See also Rome, History.) (A. H. J. G.; A. M. Cl.) 

AGREDA, MARIA FERNANDEZ CORONEL, Abbess or, 
known in religion as Sor (Sister) Maria de Jesus (1602-1665), was 
the daughter of Don Francisco Coronel and of his wife Catalina 
de Arana. She was born at Agreda, on the borders of Navarre 
and Aragon, on the 2nd of April 1602. All her family were power- 
fully influenced by the ecstatic piety of Spain in that age. Her 
biographer, Samaniego, records that even as an infant in arms she 
was filled with divine knowledge. Her stupidity as a child is 
piously accounted for by extreme humility. From childhood she 
was favoured by ecstasies and visions. When she was fifteen the 
whole family entered religion. The father, now an old man, and 
the two sons entered the Franciscan house of San Antonio de 
Nalda. Maria, her mother and sister established a Franciscan 
nunnery in the family house at Agreda, which, when Maria's 
reputation had extended, was replaced by the existing building. 
She began it with one hundred reals (one pound sterling) lent her 
by a devotee, and it was completed in fourteen years by voluntary 
gifts. Much against her own wish, we are told, she was appointed 
abbess at the age of twenty-five. In 1668, four years after her 
death, the Franciscans published a story that at the age of 
twenty-two she had been miraculously conveyed to Mexico, to 
convert a native people, and had made five hundred journeys 
through the air for that purpose in one year. Though the rule 
required the abbess to be changed every three years, Maria 
remained the effective ruler of Agreda till her death. The Virgin 
was declared abbess, and Maria acted as her locum tenens. In her 
later years she inclined to the " internal prayer," and neglect of 
the outward offices of the church, which was usual with the 
" alumbrados " or Quietists. The Inquisition took notice of her, 
but she was not proceeded against with severity. Maria's 
importance in religion and Spanish history is based on two 
grounds. In the earlier part of her life, while the Franciscan, 
Francisco Andres de la Torre, was her confessor, she wrote an 
Introduction to the History of the Most Blessed Virgin. It was 
destroyed by the direction of another confessor. Later on, by the 
order of her superiors, and under the guidance of her Franciscan 
confessor, Andres de Fuen Mayor, she wrote The Mystic City oj 
God. It is an extraordinary book, full of apocryphal history, 



3 86 



AGRICOLA 



visions and scholasticism, which professes to have been written by 
divine inspiration, and is devoted to praise of the Virgin. In 
1642 she sent to Philip IV. an account of a vision she had had, of 
a council of the infernal powers for the destruction of Catholicism 
and Spain. The king visited her when on his way to Aragon to 
suppress the rebellion of Catalonia. A long correspondence, 
which lasted till her death on the 29th of March 1665, was begun. 
The king folded a sheet of paper down the middle and wrote on 
the one side of the division. The answers were to be written on 
the other and the sheet returned. By a pious fraud copies were 
kept at Agreda. How far Maria was only the mouthpiece of the 
Franciscans must of course be a matter of doubt. Her corre- 
spondence was apparently suspended whenever her confessor was 
absent. She must, however, have co-operated at least, and it is 
certain that the Franciscans, who were very unfortunate in some 
of their pious women, owed not a little to her. The letters are in 
excellent Spanish, are curious reading, and are invaluable as 
illustrations for the second part of the reign of Philip IV. 

The correspondence of Sor Maria with the king has been published 
in full by Don F. Siluela, Cartas de la Venerable Madre Sor Maria de 
Agreda y del Senor Rey Don Filipe IV. (Madrid, 1885). The Mystic 
City of God is one of the most characteristic monuments of Mariolatry, 
and has continued to be much in favour with supporters of the dogma 
of the Immaculate Conception. It appeared in Madrid in 1668, with 
a biographical introduction by Samaniego, has been often reprinted, 
and was translated into French and Italian. It was for a time 
reserved by the Index, both Spanish and Papal, but was taken off 
by the influence t>f the Franciscans and of Spain, the chief supporters 
of the Immaculate Conception. An account of Maria de Agreda 
will be found in the Tracts of Michael Geddes (London, 1706), vol. iii., 
written by a competent critic and Anglican divine of the 18th century 
who detested " enthusiasm." (D. H.) 

AGRICOLA, CHRISTOPH LUDWIG (1667-1719), German 
landscape painter, was born and died at Regensburg (Ratisbon). 
He spent a great part of his life in travel, visiting England, 
Holland and France, and residing for a considerable period at 
Naples. His numerous landscapes, chiefly cabinet pictures, are 
remarkable for fidelity to nature, and especially for their skilful 
representation of varied phases of climate. In composition his 
style shows the influence of Caspar Poussin, while in light and 
colour he imitates Claude Lorraine. His pictures are to be found 
in Dresden, Brunswick, Vienna, Florence, Naples and- many 
other towns of both Germany and Italy. 

AGRICOLA (the Latinized form of the name Bauer), GEORG 
(1490-1 555), German scholar and man of science, known as " the 
father of mineralogy," was born at Glauchau in Saxony on the 
24th of March 1490. Gifted with a precocious intellect, he early 
threw himself into the pursuit of the " new learning," with such 
effect that at the age of twenty he was appointed Rector extra- 
ordinarily of Greek at the so-called Great School of Zwickau, and 
made his appearance as a writer on philology. After two years he 
gave up his appointment in order to pursue his studies at Leipzig, 
where, as rector, he received the powerful support of the pro- 
fessor of classics, Peter Mosellanus (1493-1524), a celebrated 
humanist of the time, with whom he had already been in corre- 
spondence. Here he also devoted himself to the study of medicine, 
physics and chemistry. After the death of Mosellanus he went 
for a short time to Italy, where he took his doctor's degree. On 
his return he settled as practising physician in the Joachimstal, a 
centre of mining and smelting works, his object being partly " to 
fill in the gaps in the art of healing," partly to test what had been 
written about mineralogy by careful observation of ores and the 
methods of their treatment. His thorough grounding in philology 
and philosophy had accustomed him to systematic thinking, and 
this enabled him to construct out of his studies and observations 
of minerals a logical system which he began to publish in 1528. 
Bermannus, she de re metallica dialogus, the first attempt to 
reduce to scientific order the knowledge won by practical work, 
brought Agricola into notice. In 1 530 Prince Maurice of Saxony 
appointed him historiographer with an annual allowance, and he 
migrated to Chemnitz, the centre of the mining industry, in order 
to widen the range of his observations. The citizens showed 
their appreciation of his learning by appointing him town 
physician and electing him burgomaster. His popularity was, 



however, short-lived. Chemnitz was a violent centre of the 
Protestant movement, while Agricola never wavered in his 
allegiance to the old religion; and he was forced to resign his 
office. He now lived apart from the contentious movements of 
the time, devoting himself wholly to learning. His chief interest 
was still in mineralogy; but he occupied himself also with 
medical, mathematical, theological and historical subjects, his 
chief historical work being the Dominatores Saxonici a prima 
origine ad hanc aetatem, published at Freiberg. In 1544 he 
published the De ortu et causis subterraneorum, in which he laid 
the first foundations of a physical geology, and criticized the 
theories of the ancients. In 1545 followed the De natura eorum 
quae effluunt e terra; in 1546 the De veteribus et novis metallis, 
a comprehensive account of the discovery and occurrence of 
minerals; in 1548 the De animantibus subterraneis; and in the 
two following years a number of smaller works on the metals. 
His most famous work, the De re metallica, libri xii., was pub- 
lished in 1556, though apparently finished several years before, 
since the dedication to the elector and his brother is dated 1550. 
It is a complete and systematic treatise on mining and metallurgy, 
illustrated with many fine and interesting woodcuts and contain- 
ing, in an appendix, the German equivalents for the technical 
terms used in the Latin text. It long remained a standard work, 
and marks its author as one of the most accomplished chemists 
of his time. Believing the black rock of the Schlossberg at 
Stolpen to be the same as Pliny's basalt, he applied this name to 
it, and thus originated a petrological term which has been per- 
manently incorporated in the vocabulary of science. 

In spite of the early proof that Agricola had given of the 
tolerance of his own religious attitude, he was not suffered to end 
his days in peace. He remained to the end a staunch Catholic, 
though all Chemnitz had gone over to the Lutheran creed; and 
it is said that his life was ended by a fit of apoplexy brought on 
by a heated discussion with a Protestant diyine. He died at 
Chemnitz on the 21st of November 1555, and so violent was the 
theological feeling against him, that he was not suffered to rest in 
the town to which he had added lustre. Amidst hostile demon- 
strations he was carried to Zeitz, seven miles from Chemnitz, and 
there buried. 

See article by Gumbel in Allgem. Deutsche Biog. (1875) ; 
F. L. Becher, Georg Agricola und Werner (Freiberg, 1819); F. A. 
Schmidt, Georg Agricola's Bermannus mit Einleitung (Freiberg, 
1806); Poggendorff, Biographisches Handworterbuch; Agricola s 
works passim. 

AGRICOLA, GNAEUS JULIUS (a.d. 37-93), Roman states- 
man and general, father-in-law of the historian Tacitus, was 
born on the 13th of June a.d. 37 (according to others, 39) at 
Forum Julii (Frejus) in Gallia Narbonensis. His father, Julius 
Graecinus, having been put to death by Caligula, Agricola was 
brought up by his mother Julia Procilla. After studying philo- 
sophy at Massilia, he entered the army and served (59) under 
Suetonius Paulinus in Britain. In 61 he returned to Rome, 
where he married Domitia Decidiana, a Roman lady of dis- 
tinction. In 63 he was quaestor in Asia, in 65 tribune, in 68 
praetor, and when Vespasian was proclaimed emperor, he 
immediately declared himself his supporter. In 70 he was 
appointed to the command of the 20th legion in Britain, then 
stationed at Deva (Chester). On his return to Rome at the end 
of three years he was made censor, raised to the rank of patrician, 
and appointed governor of Aquitania (74-78) . Appointed consul 
suffectus in the following year, he was admitted into the college 
of pontiffs and made governor of Britain. In the same year 
he betrothed his daughter to Tacitus. Although the legation of 
Britain lasted as a rule only three years, Agricola held the post 
for at least seven and succeeded in reconciling the inhabitants to 
Roman rule and inducing them to adopt the customs and civil- 
ization of their conquerors. His military achievements were 
equally brilliant. After conquering the Ordovices in North 
Wales and the island of Mona (Anglesey), during the next two 
years he carried his victorious arms to the Taiis (Tay; others 
read Tanaus, perhaps the north Tyne), and in his fourth cam- 
paign fortified the country between Clota and Bodotria (the 
firths of Clyde and Forth) as a protection against the attacks of 



AGRICOLA— AGRICULTURAL GANGS 



38? 



the Caledonians. Having explored the coasts of Fife and 
Forfar, he gained a decisive victory over the Caledonians under 
Galgacus at the Graupian hill (see Britain, Roman). His 
successes, however, had aroused the envy and suspicion of 
Domitian. He was recalled to Rome, 'where he lived a life of 
studied retirement, to avoid the possibility of giving offence to 
the tyrant. He died in 93, poisoned, it was rumoured, by the 
emperor's orders. The Life of Agricola by his son-in-law Tacitus 
is practically a panegyric or funeral oration. 

See Urlichs, De Vita et Honoribus Agricolae (1868); Dio Cassius 
xxxix. 50, lxvi. 20; Mommsen, Provinces of the Roman Empire 
(Eng. trans., 1886), i. 183-184, 194. 

AGRICOLA, JOHANN FRIEDRICH (1720-1774), German 
musician, was born at Dobitschen in Saxe-Altenburg, on the 
4th of January 1720. While a student of law at Leipzig he 
studied music under Johann Sebastian Bach. In 1741 he went 
to Berlin, where he studied musical composition. He was soon 
generally recognized as one of the most skilful organists of his 
time; and in 1751, as the result of a comic opera, 77 Filosofo 
convinto in amore, performed at Potsdam, he was made court 
composer to Frederick the Great. He died in Berlin on the 
1st of December 1774. In 1759, on the death of Karl Heinrich 
Graun, he was appointed conductor of the royal orchestra. 
Besides several operas of merit, he composed instrumental 
pieces and church music. His reputation chiefly rests, however, 
on his theoretical v and critical writings on musical subjects. He 
wrote under the pseudonym of Flavio Anicio Olibrio. 

AGRICOLA (originally Schneider, then Schnitter), 
JOHANNES (1494-1566), German Protestant reformer, was born 
on the 20th of April 1494, at Eisleben, whence he is sometimes 
called Magister Islebius. He studied at Wittenberg, where he 
soon gained the friendship of Luther. In 1519 he accompanied 
Luther to the great assembly of German divines at Leipzig, and 
acted as recording secretary. After teaching for some time in 
Wittenberg, he went to Frankfort in 1525 to establish the re- 
formed mode of worship. He had resided there only a month 
when he was called to Eisleben, where he remained till 1526 as 
teacher in the school of St Andrew, and preacher in the Nicolai 
church. In 1536 he was recalled to teach in Wittenberg, and 
was welcomed by Luther. Almost immediately, however, a 
controversy, which had been begun ten years before and been 
temporarily silenced, broke out more violently than ever. 
Agricola was the first to teach the views which Luther was the 
first to stigmatize by the now well-known name Antinomian 
(q.v.), maintaining that while the unregenerate were still under 
the Mosaic law, Christians were entirely free from it, being under 
the gospel alone. In consequence of the bitter controversy with 
Luther that resulted, Agricola in 1540 left Wittenberg secretly 
for Berlin, where he published a letter addressed to the elector 
of Saxony, which was generally interpreted as a recantation of 
his obnoxious views. Luther, however, seems not to have so 
accepted it, and Agricola remained at Berlin. The elector 
Joachim II. of Brandenburg, having taken him into his favour, 
appointed him court preacher and general superintendent. He 
held both offices until his death in 1566, and his career in 
Brandenburg was one of great activity and influence. Along 
with Julius von Pflug, bishop of Naumburg-Zeitz, and Michael 
Helding, titular bishop of Sidon, he prepared the Augsburg 
Interim of 1548. He endeavoured in vain to appease the Adi- 
aphoristic controversy (see Adiaphorists). He died during an 
epidemic of plague on the 22nd of September 1566. Agricola 
wrote a number of theological works which are now of little 
interest. He was the first to make a collection of German 
proverbs which he illustrated with a commentary. The most 
complete edition, which contains seven hundred and fifty pro- 
verbs, is that published at Wittenberg in 1592; a modern one 
is that of Latendorf, 1862. 

See Cordes, Joh. Agricola's Schriften mbglichst verzeichnet (Altona, 
1817); Life by G. Kawerau (1881), who also wrote the notice in 
Hauck-Herzog, Realencyk. fur prot. TheoL, where other literature is 
cited. 

AGRICOLA, MARTIN (c. 1500-1556), German musician, was 
born about 1500 in Lower Silesia. His German name was Sohr 



or Sore. From 1524 till his death he lived at Magdeburg, where 
he occupied the post of teacher or cantor in the Protestant 
school. The senator and music-printer Rhau, of Wittenberg, 
was a close friend of Agricola, whose theoretical works, providing 
valuable material concerning the change from the old to the 
new system of notation, he published. Agricola was also the 
first to harmonize in four parts Luther's chorale, Em' feste Burg. 

Four other Agricolas 1 are known as composers between the 
end of the 15 th century and the middle of the 17 th. 

In the 18th century we find Burney, in the course of his tour 
in Germany (1772), much impressed by Johann Friedrich 
Agricola (1720-1774), court composer and director of the royal 
chapel to Frederick the Great. This Agricola was a pupil of 
Bach, and a fine organist and clever writer on music, especially 
on operatic style, the problems of which were beginning to be 
raised by French writers^atvd composers in preparation for the 
work of Gluck. 

AGRICOLA, RODOLPHUS (properly Roelof Huysmann) 
(1443-1485), Dutch scholar, was born at Baflo, near, Groningen, in 
1443. He was educated at Louvain, where he graduated as 
master of arts. After residing for some time in Paris, he went 
in 1476 to Ferrara in Italy, and attended the lectures of the 
celebrated Theodorus Gaza (1400-1478) on the Greek language. 
Having visited Pavia and Rome, he returned to his native 
country about 1479, and was soon afterwards appointed syndic 
of Groningen. In 1482, on the invitation of Johann von Dalberg, 
bishop of Worms (1445-1503), whose friendship he ha^ gained 
in Italy, he accepted a professorship at Heidelberg, and for 
three years delivered lectures there and at Worms on the litera- 
ture of Greece and Rome. By his personal influence much more 
than by his writings he did much for the promotion of learning 
in Germany; and Erasmus and other critics of the generation 
immediately succeeding his own are full of his praises. In his 
opposition to the scholastic philosophy he in some degree antici- 
pated the great intellectual revolution in which many of his 
pupils were conspicuous actors. He died at Heidelberg on the 
28th of October 1485. His principal work is De inventione 
dialectica, libri Hi., in which he attempts to change the scholastic 
philosophy of the day. . 

See T. F. Tresling, Vita et Merita Rudolphi Agricolae (Groningen, 
1830); v. Bezold, R. Agricola (Miinchen, 1884); and Ihm, Der 
Humanist R. Agricola, sein Leben und seine Schriften (Paderb., 1893). 

AGRICULTURAL GANGS, groups of women, girls and boys 
organized by an independent gang-master, under whose super- 
vision they execute agricultural piece-work for farmers in certain 
parts of England. They are sometimes called " public gangs " 
to distinguish them from " private gangs " consisting of workers 
engaged by the farmer himself, and undertaking work solely for 
him, under his own supervision or under that of one of his men. 
The system was for long prevalent in the counties of Cambridge- 
shire, Huntingdonshire, Lincolnshire, Nottinghamshire, Norfolk 
and Suffolk, and is still to be found in a much modified form in 
the fen district. The practice dates from the latter years of the 
reign of George III., when the low-lying, marshy lands surround- 
ing the basin of the Wash were being rapidly drained and con- 
verted into rich alluvial districts. The unreformed condition of 
the poor-law, under which the support of the poor fell upon each 
individual parish, instead of a union of parishes, made landlords 
reluctant to erect cottages on the reclaimed land for the benefit 
of their tenants. Labour had to be obtained for the cultivation 
of these new lands, and that of women, girls and boys, being 
cheaper than the labour of men, was consequently very largely 
employed. The tendency to moral and physical ruin which 
resulted from this nomadic life was so great that an inquiry into 
the condition of agricultural child-labour was included in the 
reference to the commission on child-labour appointed in 1862, 
and the results were so startling that the Agricultural Gangs 
Act was passed in 1867, forbidding the employment of any child 
under eight years old, and of any female under a male gang- 
master unless a female licensed to act as gang-mistress were also 

1 Alexander, died 1506; Johann, flor. 1600; Wolfgang Christoph, 
flor. 1630; and George Ludwig, 1643-1676. 



3 88 



AGRICULTURE 



[ANCIENT SYSTEMS 



present. Gang-masters must be licensed by two justices, and 
may not hold a liquor license. The distance to be traversed 
on foot is fixed by the justices, and the licenses must be renewed 
every six months. Later legislation made more stringent the 
regulations under which children are employed in agricultural 
gangs. By the Elementary Education Act 1876, repealing and 
re-enacting the principal provisions of the Agricultural (Children) 
Act 1873, no child shall be employed under the age of eleven 
years, and none between eleven years and thirteen years before 
the child has obtained a certificate of having reached the 
standard of education fixed by a by-law in force in the district. 

AGRICULTURE (from Lat. ager, field, and colere, to cultivate), 
the science, art and industry of utilizing the soil so as to produce 
the means of human subsistence, embracing in its widest sense 
the rearing of live-stock as well as the raising of crops. The 
history of agriculture is the history of man in his most primitive, 
and most permanent aspect. Hence the nations of antiquity 
ascribed to it a divine origin; Brahma in Hindustan, Isis in 
Egypt, Demeter in Greece, and Ceres in Italy, were its founders. 
The simplest form of agriculture is that in which crops are raised 
from one patch of ground till it is exhausted, when it is allowed 
to go wild and abandoned for another. This " extensive " 
husbandry is found in combination with a nomadic or semi- 
nomadic and pastoral organization, such as that of the German 
tribes described by Caesar and Tacitus (see especially Germania, 
26). The discovery of the uses of the bare fallow and of manure, 
by making it possible to raise crops from the same area for an 
indefinite period, marks a stage of progress. This " intensive " 
culture in a more or less developed form was practised by the 
great nations of antiquity, and little decided advance was made 
till after the middle ages. The introduction of new plants, which 
made it possible to dispense with the bare fallow, and still later 
the application to husbandry of scientific discoveries as to soils, 
plant constituents and manures, brought about a revolution 
in farming. But the progress of husbandry, evidenced by the 
production of larger and better crops with more certainty, is 
due to that rationalizing of agricultural practices which is the 
work of modern times. What before was done in the light of 
experience is nowadays done in the light of knowledge. Even 
the earliest forms of intensive cultivation demand the practice 
of the fundamental processes of husbandry — ploughing, manur- 
ing, sowing, weeding, reaping. It is the improvements in methods, 
implements and materials, brought about by the application 
of science, that distinguish the husbandry of the 20th century 
from that of medieval and ancient times. 

Ancient Husbandry. — The monumental records of Egypt are 
the source of the earliest information on farming. The Egypt 
g_,- t of the Pharaohs was a country of great estates farmed 
either by tenants or by slaves or labourers under the 
superintendence of stewards. It owed its fertility to the Nile, 
which, inundating the land near its banks, was distributed by 
means of canals over more distant portions of its valley. The 
autumnal subsidence of the river was followed by shallow 
ploughing performed by oxen yoked to clumsy wooden ploughs, 
the clods being afterwards levelled with wooden hoes by hand. 
Next came the sowing, the seed being pressed into the soil by 
the feet of sheep which were driven over the fields. At harvest 
the corn was cut high on the stalk with short sickles and put 
up in sheaves, after which it was carried to the threshing-floor 
and there trodden out by the hoofs of oxen. Winnowing was 
done by women, who tossed the grain into the air with small 
wooden boards, the chaff being blown away by the winds. Wheat 
and barley were the chief crops, and another plant, perhaps 
identical with the durra, i.e. millet, of modern Egypt, was also 
cultivated. The latter, when ripe, was pulled up by the roots, 
and the grain was separated by means of an implement re- 
sembling a comb. To these crops may be added peas, beans 
and many herbs and esculent roots. Oxen were much prized, 
and breeding was carried on with a careful eye to selection. 
Immense numbers of ducks and geese were reared. 

Diodorus Siculus, writing of later times, says that cattle were 
sent during a portion of each year to the marshy pastures of 



the delta, where they roamed under the care of herdsmen. They 
were fed with hay during the annual inundation, and at other 
times tethered in meadows of green clover. The flocks were 
shorn twice annually (a practice common to several Asiatic 
countries), and the ewes yeaned twice a year. (See also Egypt.) 

The agriculture of the region bordering the Tigris and 
Euphrates, like that of Egypt, depended largely on irrigation, 
and traces of ancient canals are still to be seen in Babylonia. 
But beyond the fact that both Babylonia and Assyria were 
large producers of cereals, little is known of their husbandry. 

The nomads of the patriarchal ages, whilst mainly dependent 
upon their flocks and herds, practised also agriculture proper. 
The tracts over which they roamed were in ordinary „.. .. . 
circumstances common to all shepherds alike. During accounts 
the summer they frequented the mountainous districts, among 
and retired to the valleys to winter. Vast flocks of the 
sheep and of goat constituted their wealth, although 
they also possessed oxen. When the last were abundant, 
it seems to be an indication that tillage was practised. 
Job, besides immense possessions in flocks and herds, had 
500 yoke of oxen, which he employed in ploughing, and a " very 
great husbandry." Isaac, too, conjoined tillage with pastoral 
husbandry, and that with success, for " he sowed in the land 
Gerar, and reaped an hundred-fold " — a return which, it would 
appear, in some favoured regions, occasionally rewarded the 
labour of the husbandman. In the parable of the sower, Jesus 
Christ mentions an increase of thirty, sixty and an hundred fold. 

Along with the Babylonians, Egyptians and Romans, the 
Israelites are classed as one of the great agricultural nations of 
antiquity. The Mosaic Institute contained an agrarian law, 
based upon an equal division of the soil amongst the adult males, 
a census of whom was taken just before their entrance into 
Canaan. Provision was thus made for 600,000 yeomen, assigning 
(according to different calculations) from sixteen to twenty -five 
acres of land to each. This land, held in direct tenure from 
Jehovah, their sovereign, was in theory inalienable. The 
accumulation of debt upon it was prevented by the prohibition 
of interest, the release of debts every seventh year, and the 
reversion of the land to the proprietor, or his heirs, at each return 
of the year of jubilee. The owners of these small farms cultivated 
them with much care, and rendered them highly productive. 
They were favoured with a soil extremely fertile, and one which 
their skill and diligence kept in good condition. The stones 
were carefully cleared from the fields, which were also watered 
from canals and conduits, communicating with the brooks and 
streams with which the country " was well watered everywhere," 
and enriched by the application of manures. The seventh year's 
fallow prevented the exhaustion of the soil, which was further 
enriched by the burning of the weeds and spontaneous growth 
of the Sabbatical year. The crops chiefly cultivated were wheat, 
millet, barley, beans and lentils; to which it is supposed, on 
grounds not improbable, may be added rice and cotton. The 
chief implements were a wooden plough of simple and light 
construction, a hoe or mattock, and a light harrow. The ox 
and the ass were used for labour. The word " oxen," which 
occurs in our version of the Scriptures, as well as in the Septua- 
gint and Vulgate, denotes the species, rather than the sex. As 
the Hebrews did not mutilate any of their animals, bulls were 
in common use. The quantity of land ploughed by a yoke 
of oxen in one day was called a yoke or acre. Towards the 
end of October, with which month the rainy season begins, seed- 
time commenced, and of course does so still. The seedtime, 
begun in October, extends, for wheat and some other white 
crops, through November and December; and barley continues 
to be sown until about the middle of February. The seed 
appears to have been sometimes ploughed in, and at other 
times to have been covered by harrowing. The cold winds 
which prevail in January and February frequently injured 
the crops in the more exposed and higher districts. The 
rainy season extends from October to April, during which time 
refreshing showers fall, chiefly during the night, and generally 
at intervals of a few days. The harvest was earjier or later as 



ANCIENT SYSTEMS] 



AGRICULTURE 



389 



Greece. 



the rains towards the end of the season were more or less copious. 
It, however, generally began in April, and continued through 
May for the different crops in succession. In the south, and in 
the plains, the harvest, as might be expected, commenced some 
weeks earlier than in the northern and mountainous districts. 
The slopes of the hills were carefully terraced and irrigated 
wherever practicable, and on these slopes the vine and olive 
were cultivated with great success. At the same time the hill 
districts and neighbouring deserts afforded pasturage for 
numerous flocks and herds, and thus admitted of the benefits of 
a mixed husbandry. Not by a figure of speech but literally, every 
Israelite sat under the shadow of his own vine and fig-tree; 
whilst the country as a whole is described (2 Kings xviii. 32) as 
" a land of corn and wine, a land of bread and vineyards, a land 
of oil olive and of honey." 

The earliest known forms of intensive husbandry were based 
chiefly upon the proximity of rivers and irrigation. The agri- 
culture of classical ages was slightly more developed in 
so far as the husbandman of Greece and Rome was less 
able to leave to nature the fertilization of the soil. Greece being 
a mountainous land was favourable to the culture of the vine 
rather than to that of cereals. Scanty information on its agri- 
culture is to be derived from the Works and Days of Hesiod (about 
the 8th century B.C.), the Oeconomicus of Xenophon (4th century 
B.C.), the History of Plants and the Origin of Plants of Theo- 
phrastus (4th century B.C.). The latter is the first writer on 
botany, and his works also contain interesting remarks on 
manures, the mixing of soils and other agricultural topics (see 
also Geoponici). Greek husbandry had no salient character- 
istics. The summer fallow with repeated ploughing was its basis. 
The young crop was hoed, reaping was performed with a sickle, 
and a high stubble left on the ground as manure. The methods 
of threshing and winnowing were the same as those in use in 
ancient Egypt. Wheat, barley and spelt were the leading crops. 
Meadows were pastured rather than mown. Attica was famous 
for its olives and figs, but general agriculture excelled in Pelo- 
ponnesus, where, by means of irrigation and drainage, all the 
available land was utilized. 

In the early days of the Roman republic land in Italy was held 
largely by small proprietors, and agriculture was highly esteemed 
Rome an( ^ c l asse d with war as an occupation becoming a free 
man. The story of Cincinnatus, twice summoned from 
the plough to the highest offices in the state, illustrates the status 
of the Roman husbandman. The later tendency was towards the 
absorption of smaller holdings into large estates. As wealth 
increased the peasant-farmer gave way before the large land- 
owner, who cultivated his property by means of slave-labour, 
superintended by slave-bailiffs. The low price of grain, which 
was imported in huge quantities from Sicily and other Roman 
provinces, operated to crush the small holder, at the same time 
as it made arable farming unremunerative. Sheep-raising, 
involving larger holdings, less supervision and less labour, was 
preferred by the capitalist land-holder to the cultivation of the 
wheat, spelt, vines or olives which were the chief crops of the 
country. Lupine, beans, peas and vetches were grown for 
fodder, and meadows, often artificially watered, supplied hay. 
Swine and poultry were used for food to a greater extent than 
oxen, which were bred chiefly for ploughing. The following 
epitome of Virgil's advice to the husbandman in the first book of 
the Georgics suggests the outline of Roman husbandry: " First 
learn the peculiarities of your soil and climate. Plough the 
fallow in early spring, and plough frequently— twice in winter, 
twice in summer unless your land is poor, when a light ploughing 
in September will do. Either let the land lie fallow every other 
year or else let spelt follow pulse, vetches or lupine. Repetition 
of one crop exhausts the ground; rotation will lighten the 
strain, only the exhausted soil must be copiously dressed with 
manure or ashes. It often does good to burn the stubble on the 
ground. Harrow down the clods, level the ridges by cross 
ploughing, work the land thoroughly. Irrigation benefits a sandy 
soil, draining a marshy soil. It is well to feed down a luxuriant 
crop when the plants are level with the ridge tops. Geese and 



Cranes, chicory, mildew, thistles, cleavers, caltrops, darnel and 
shade are farmer's enemies. Scare off the birds, harrow up the 
weeds, cut down all that shades the crop. Ploughs, waggons, 
threshing-sledges, harrows, baskets, hurdles, winnowing-fans are 
the farmer's implements. The plough consists of several parts 
made of seasoned wood. The threshing-floor must be smooth and 
rammed hard to leave no crevices for weeds and small animals to 
get through. Some steep seed in soda and oil lees to get a larger 
produce. Careful annual selection by hand of the best seed is the 
only way to prevent degeneration. , It is best to mow stubble and 
hay at night when they are moist." 

In addition to the use of several kinds of animal and other 
manures,, green crops were sometimes ploughed in by the Romans. 
The shrewdness which, more than inventiveness, characterized 
their husbandry comes out well in the following quotation from 
the 1 8th book of the Natural History of Pliny: — " Cato would 
have this point especially to be considered, that the soil of a farm 
be good and fertile; also, that near it there be plenty of labourers 
and that it be not far from a large town; moreover, that it have 
sufficient means for transporting its produce, either by water or 
land. Also that the house be well built, and the land about it as 
well managed. They are in error who hold the opinion that the 
negligence and bad husbandry of the former owner is good for his 
successor. Now, I say there is nothing more dangerous and 
disadvantageous to the buyer than land so left waste and out of 
heart; and therefore Cato counsels well to purchase land of one 
who has managed it well, and not rashly to despise and make 
light of the skill and knowledge of another." 

Roman writers on agriculture (see Geoponici) are mpre 
numerous than those of Greece. The earliest important treatises 
are the De re Rustica of Cato (234-149 B.C.) and the Rerum 
Rusticarum Libri of Varro. More famous than either are the 
Georgics oi Virgil, published about 30 B.C., and treating of tillage, 
horticulture, cattle-breeding and bee-keeping. The works of 
Columella (1st century a.d.) and of Palladius (4th century a.d.) 
are exhaustive treatises, and the Natural History of the elder 
Pliny (a.d. 23-70) contains considerable information on hus- 
bandry. Under the later empire agriculture sank into a condition 
of neglect, in which it remained throughout the Dark Ages. In 
Spain its revival was due to the Saracens, and by them, and their 
successors the Moors, agriculture was carried to a high pitch of 
excellence. The work on agriculture 1 of Ibn-al-Awam, who 
lived in the 12th century a.d., treats of the varieties of soils, 
manuring, irrigation, ploughing, sowing, harvesting, stock, 
horticulture, arboriculture and plant diseases, and is a lasting 
record of their skill and industry. 

The subsequent history of agriculture is treated in the following 
pages primarily from the British standpoint. Doubtless Flanders 
may claim to be the pioneer of " high farming " in medieval 
times, other countries following her lead in many respects. It is 
not, however, necessary to deal with the agricultural evolution of 
continental Europe, the gradual progress of agriculture as a whole 
being well enough typified in the story of its development in 
England, which indeed has led the way in modern times. After 
sections on the history and chief modern features of British 
agriculture, a separate account is given of the general features of 
American agriculture. 

History of English Agriculture 

The " combined " or " common-field " system of husbandry 
practised by the village community or township (see Village 
Communities) may be taken as the starting-point of English 
agriculture, in which, till the end of the 18th century, it is a 
dominant influence. The territory of the " township " consisted 
of arable land, meadow, pasture and waste. The arable land 
was divided into two or, more usually, three fields, which were 
cut up into strips bounded by balks and allotted to the villagers 
in such a way that one holding might include several discon- 
nected strips in each field — a measure designed to prevent the 
whole of the best land falling to one man. The fields were fenced 
in from seed-time to harvest, after which the fences were taken 
1 Translation by Clement-Mullet (Paris, 1864). 



39° 



AGRICULTURE 



[BRITISH 



down and the cattle turned in to feed on the stubble. Accord- 
ing to early methods of cropping, which were destined to prevail 
for centuries, wheat, the chief article of food, was sown in one 
autumn, reaped the next August; the following spring, oats or 
barley were sown, and the year following the harvest was a 
period of fallow. This procedure was followed on each of the 
three fields so that in every year one of them was fallow. In 
addition to the cereals, beans, peas and vetches were grown to 
some extent. The meadow-land was also divided into strips 
from which the various holders drew their supply of hay. The 
pasture-land was common to all, though the number of beasts 
which one man might turn into it was sometimes limited. 
Rough grazing could also be had on the outlying waste lands. 
In the absence of artificial grasses and roots, hay was very 
valuable; it constituted almost the only winter food for live 
stock, which were consequently in poor condition in spring. 

Under the manorial system, the rise of which preceded the 
Norman Conquest, communal methods of husbandry remained, 
but the position of the cultivator was radically altered. 
" Villeins," instead of free-holders, formed the most numerous 
class of the population. They were bound to the soil and occu- 
pied holdings of scattered strips (amounting usually to a virgate 
or 30 acres) in return for a payment partly in labour and partly 
in kind. A portion of the manor, generally about a third, con- 
stituted the lord's demesne, which, though sometimes separate, 
usually consisted of strips intermingled with those of his villeins. 
It thus formed part of the common farm and was cultivated by 
the villeins and their oxen under the superintendence of a 
bailiff. Below the villeins in the social scale came the cottiers 
possessing smaller holdings, sometimes only a garden, and no 
oxen. Free tenants and, after the Norman Conquest, slaves 
formed small proportions of the population. During the middle 
ages cattle and sheep were the chief farm animals, but the inter- 
mixture of stock consequent on the common-field system was 
a barrier to improvement in the breed and conduced to the 
propagation of disease. Oxen, usually yoked in teams of eight, 
were used for ploughing. Sheep were small and their fleeces 
light, nevertheless, owing to the meagreness of the yields of 
cereals 1 and the demand for wool for export, sheep-farming 
was looked to, as early as the 12th century, as the chief source 
of profit. Pigs and poultry were universally kept. The treatise 
on husbandry of Walter of Henley, dating from the early 13th 
century, is very valuable as describing the management of the 
demesne under the two- or three-field system. The following 
are typical passages: — 

" April is a good season for fallowing, if the earth breaks up behind 
the plough ; for second fallowing after St John's Day when the dust 
rises behind the plough; for seed-ploughing when the earth is well 
settled and not too cracked ; however, the busy man cannot be 
always waiting on the seasons." " At sowing do not plough large 
furrows, but little and well laid together, that the seed may fall 
evenly." 

" Know that an acre sown with wheat takes three ploughings, 
except lands that are sown each year, and that each ploughing costs 
6d. more or less and the harrowing id. It is well to sow at least two 
bushels to the acre." 

" Change your seed every year at Michaelmas, for the seed grown 
on other land will bring you more than that grown on your own." 

" Neither sell your stubble nor move it from the ground unless 
you need it for thatching. Have manure put up in heaps and mixed 
with earth." 

" Ridge marshy ground so as to let the water run off." 

During the 13th century there arose a tendency to commute 
labour-rents for money payments. This change led to the 
gradual disappearance of tenants in villeinage — the villeins and 
cottiers — and the rise on the one hand of the small independent 
farmer, on the other of the hired labourer. The plague of 1348 
marks an epoch in English agriculture. The diminution of the 
population by one-half led to a scarcity of labour and an increase 
of wages which deprived the landowner of his narrow margin 
of profit. To meet this situation, the Statute of Labourers 
(1351) enacted that no man should refuse to work at the same 
rate of wages as prevailed before the plague. In addition the 

1 Walter of Henley mentions six bushels per acre as a satisfactory 
crop. 



landowners attempted to revive the disappearing system of 
labour-rents. The bitter feelings engendered between em- 
ployer and employed culminated in the peasants' revolt of 1381. 
Meanwhile large numbers of landowners were forced to adopt 
one of two alternatives. In some cases they ceased to farm their 
own land and let it out on lease often together with the stock 
upon it; or else they abandoned arable culture, laid down their 
demesnes to pasture, enclosed the waste lands and devoted them- 
selves to sheep-farming. In the latter course they were en- 
couraged by the high prices of wool during the 14th century, and 
by Edward III.'s policy of fostering both the export of wool and 
the home manufacture of woollen goods. The 15th century, 
barren of progress in methods of husbandry, was in its early 
years moderately prosperous. Later on the increasing abandon- 
ment of arable husbandry for sheep-farming brought about a 
less demand for labour, and rural depopulation was accelerated 
as the peasant was deprived of his grazing-ground by the en- 
closure of more and more of the waste land. 2 

From the beginning of the reign of Henry VII. to the end of 
Elizabeth's, a number of statutes were made for the encourage- 
ment of tillage, though probably to little purpose. Aer]cut . 
" Where in some towns," says the statute 4th tun under 
Henry VII. (1488), " two hundred persons were occu- the Tudors 
pied and lived of their lawful labours, now there are *" d 
occupied two or three herdsmen, and the residue fall 
into idleness"; therefore it is ordained that houses which 
within three years have been let for farms, with twenty acres 
of land lying in tillage or husbandry, shall be upheld, under 
the penalty of half the profits, to be forfeited to the king 
or the lord of the fee. Almost half a century afterwards the 
practice had become still more alarming; and in 1534 a new 
act was tried, apparently with as little success. " Some have 
24,000 sheep, some 20,000 sheep, some 10,000, some 6000, some 
4000, and some more and some less "; and yet it is alleged the 
price of wool had nearly doubled, " sheep being come to a few 
persons' hands." A penalty was therefore imposed on all who 
kept above 2000 sheep; and no person was to take in farm more 
than two tenements of husbandry. By the 39th Elizabeth (1597) 
arable land made pasture since the 1st Elizabeth shall be again 
converted into tillage, and what is arable shall not be converted 
into pasture. 

The literature of agriculture, in abeyance since the treatise 
of Walter of Henley, makes another beginning in the 16th 
century. The best of the early works is the Book of Husbandry 
(1st ed. 1523), commonly ascribed to Sir Anthony Fitzherbert, 
a judge of the Common Pleas in the reign of Henry VIII., but 
more probably written by his elder brother John. This was 
followed by the Book of Surveying and Improvements (1523), by the 
same author, In the former treatise we have a clear and minute 
description of the rural practices of that period, and from the 
latter may be learned a good deal of the economy of the feudal 
system in its decline. 

The Book of Husbandry begins with a description of the plough 
and other implements, after which about a third part of it is 
occupied with the several operations as they succeed one another 
throughout the year. Among other passages in this part of the 
work, the following deserve notice: — 

"Somme (ploughs) wyll tournthe sheld bredith at every landsende, 
and plowe all one way "; the same kind of plough that is now found 
so useful on hilly grounds. Of wheel-ploughs he observes, that 
" they be good on even grounde that lyeth lyghte "; and on such 
lands they are still most commonly employed. Cart-wheels were 
sometimes bound with iron, of which he greatly approves. On the 
much agitated question about the employment of horses or oxen 
in labour, the most important arguments are distinctly stated. 

" In some places," he says, "a horse plough is better," and in 
others an oxen plough, to which, upon the whole, he gives the pre- 
ference. Beans and peas seem to have been common crops. He 
mentions the different kinds of wheat, barley and oats; and after 
describing the method of harrowing " all maner of cornnes," we 
find the roller employed. "They used to role their barley grounde 

1 This process of enclosure must be distinguished from that of 
enclosing the arable common fields which, though advocated by 
Fitzherbert in a passage quoted below proceeded slowly till the 
1 8th century. 



BRITISH] 



AGRICULTURE 



39* 



after a showr of rayne, to make the grounde even to mowe." Under 
the article " To falowe," he observes, " the greater clottes (clods) the 
better wheate, for the clottes kepe the wheat warme all wynter ; and 
at March they will melte and breake and fal in manye small peces, 
the whiche is a new dongynge and refreshynge of the corne." This 
is agreeable to the present practice, founded on the very same 
reasons. "In May, the shepe folde is to be set out " ; but Fitzherbert 
does not much approve of folding, and points out its disadvantages 
in a very judicious manner. " In the latter end of May and the 
begynnynge of June, is tyme to wede the corne " ; and then we have 
an accurate description of the different weeds, and the instruments 
and mode of weeding. Next comes a second ploughing of the fallow ; 
and afterwards, in the latter end of June, the mowing of the meadows 
begins. Of this operation, and of the forks and rakes and the hay- 
making there is a very good account. The corn harvest naturally 
follows: rye and wheat were usually shorn, and barley and oats cut 
with the scythe. The writer does not approve of the common 
practice of cutting wheat high and then mowing the stubbles. " In 
Somersetshire," he says, " they do shere theyr wheat very lowe; and 
the wheate strawe that they purpose to make thacke of, they do not 
threshe it, but cut off the ears, and bynd it in sheves, and call it rede, 
and therewith they thacke theyr houses." He recommends the 
practice of setting up corn in shocks, with two sheaves to cover eight, 
instead of ten sheaves as at present — probably owing to the straw 
being then shorter. The corn was commonly housed; but if there 
be a want of room, he advises that the ricks be built on a scaffold 
and not upon the ground. The fallow received a third ploughing in 
September, and was sown about Michaelmas. " Wheat is moost 
commonlye sowne under the forowe, that is to say, cast it uppon the 
falowe, and then plowe it under "; and this branch of his subject 
is concluded with directions about threshing, winnowing and other 
kinds of barn-work/ 

Fitzherbert next proceeds to live stock. " An housbande," he 
says, " can not well thryue by his corne without he have other 
cattell, nor by his cattcll without corne. And bycause that shepe, in 
myne opynyon, is the mooste profytablest cattell that any man can 
haue, therefore I pourpose to speake fyrst of shepe." His remarks 
on this subject are so accurate that one might imagine they came 
from a storemaster of the present day. 

In some places at present "they neuerseuertheir lambesfrom their 
dammes " ; " and the poore of the peeke (high) countreye, and such 
other places, where, as they vse to mylke theyr ewes, they vse to 
wayne theyr lambes at 12 weekes olde, and to mylke their ewes fiue 
or syxe weekes " ; but that, he observes, " is greate hurte to the ewes, 
and wyll cause them that they wyll not take the ramme at the tyme 
of the yere for pouertye, but goo barreyne." " In June is tyme to 
shere shepe ; and ere they be shorne, they must be verye well washen, 
the which shall be to the owner greate profyte in the sale of his wool, 
and also to the clothe-maker." 

His remarks on horses, cattle, &c, are not less interesting; and 
there is a very good account of the diseases of each species, and some 
just observations on the advantage of mixing different kinds on the 
same pasture. Swine and bees conclude this branch of the work. 

The author then points out the great advantages of enclosure; 
recommends " quycksettynge, dychynge and hedgeyng "; and gives 
particular directions about settes, and the method of training a hedge, 
as well as concerning the planting and management of trees. Fitz- 
herbert throws some light on the position of women in the agri- 
culture of his day. "It is a wyues occupation," he says, " to wynowe 
all maner of cornes, to make malte, to washe and wrynge, to make 
heye, shere corne, and, in time of nede, to helpe her husbande to 
fyll the mucke wayne or dounge carte, dryue the ploughe, to loode 
heye, corne and suche other; and to go or ride to the market to sel 
butter, chese, mylke, egges, chekyns, capons, hennes, pygges, gese, 
and all maner of cornes." 

The Book of Surveying adds considerably to our knowledge 
of the rural economy of that age. " Four maner of commens " 
are described; several kinds of mills for corn and other purposes, 
and also " quernes that goo with hand"; different orders of 
tenants, down to the " boundmen," who " in some places con- 
tynue as yet "; " and many tymes, by colour thereof, there be 
many freemen taken as boundmen, and their lands and goods is 
taken from them." Lime and marl are mentioned as common 
manures, and the former was sometimes spread on the surface to 
destroy heath. Both draining and irrigation are noticed, though 
the latter but slightly. And the work concludes with an inquiry 
" how to make a township that is worth XX. marke a yere, 
worth XX. li. a year," advocating the transition from communal 
or open field to individual or enclosure farming. 

"It is undoubted, that to every townshyppe that standeth in 
tyllage in the playne countrey, there be errable landes to plowe and 
sowe, and leyse to tye or tedder theyr horses and mares upon, and 
common pasture to kepe and pasture their catell, beestes and shepe 
upon; and also they have medowe grounde to get theyr hey upon. 
Than to let it De known how many acres of errable lande euery man 
hath in tyllage, and of the same acres in euery felde to chaunge with 



his neyghbours, and to. leve them toguyther, and to make hym one 
seuerall close in euery felde for his errable lands; and his leyse .in 
euery felde to leve them togyther in one felde, and to makeone seuerall 
close for them all. And also another seuerall close for his portion 
of his common pasture, and also his porcion of his medowe in a 
seuerall close by itselfe, and al kept in seureall both in wynter and 
somer; and euery cottage shall haue his portion assigned hym 
accordynge to his rent, and than shall nat the ryche man ouerpresse 
the poore man with his cattell; and euery man may eate his oun 
close at his pleasure. And vndoubted, that hay and strawe that will 
find one beest in the house wyll finde two beestes in the close, and 
better they shall lyke. For those beestis in the house have short 
heare and thynne, and towards March they will pylle and be bare; 
and therefore they may nat abyde in the fylde before the heerdmen 
in wintertyme for colde. And those that lyein a close undera hedge 
haue longe heare and thyck, and they will neuer pylle nor be bare; 
and by this reason the husbande maye kepe twyse so many catell 
as he did before. 

" This is the cause of this approwment. Nowe euery husbande 
hath sixe seuerall closes, whereof iii. be for corne, the fourthe for his 
leyse, the fyfte for his commen pastures, and the sixte for his haye; 
and in wynter time there is but one occupied with corne, and than 
hath the husbande other fyue to occupy tyll lente come, and that he 
hath his falowe felde, his ley felde, and his pasture felde al sommer. 
And when he hath mowen his medowe, then he hath his medowe 
grounde, soo that if he hath any weyke catell that wold be amended, 
or dyvers maner of catell, he may put them in any close he wyll, the 
which is a great advantage; and if all shulde lye commen, than 
wolde the edyche of the corne feldes and the aftermath of all the 
medowes be eaten in X. or XII. dayes. And the rych men that hath 
moche catell wold have the advantage, and the poore man can have 
no help nor relefe in wynter when he hath moste nede ; and if an 
acre of lande be worthe sixe pens, or it be enclosed, it will be worth 
VIII. pens, when it is enclosed by reason of the compostying and 
dongyng of the catell that shall go and lye upon it both day and 
nighte; and if any of his thre closes that he hath for his corne be 
worne or ware bare, than he may breke and plowe up his close that 
he hadde for his layse, or the close that he hadde for his Commen 
pasture, or bothe, and sowe them with corne, and let the other lye 
for a time, and so shall he have always reist grounde, the which will 
bear moche corne with lytel donge; and also he shall have a great 
profyte of the wod in the hedges whan it is growen; and not only 
these profytes and advantages beforesaid, but he shall save moche 
more than al these, for by reason of these closes he shall save meate, 
drinke and wages of a shepherde, the wages of the heerdmen, and 
the wages of the swine herde, the which may fortune to be as charge- 
able as all his nolle rente; and also his corne shall be better saved 
from eatinge or destroying with catel. For dout ye nat but heerde- 
men with their catell, shepeherdes with their shepe, and tieng of horses 
and mares, destroyeth moch corne, the which the hedges wold save. 
Paraduenture some men would say that this shuld be against the 
common weale, bicause the shepeherdes, heerdmen and swyne-herdes 
shuld than be put out of wages. To that it may be answered, 
though these occupations be not used, there be as many newe 
occupations that were not used before; as getting of quicke settes, 
diching, hedging and plashing, the which the same men may use 
and occupye." 

The next author who writes professedly on agriculture is 
Thomas Tusser, whose Five Hundred Points of Husbandry, 
published in 1562, enjoyed such lasting repute that in 1723 Lord 
Molesworth recommended that it should be taught in schools. 
In it the book of husbandry consists of 118 pages, and then 
follows the Points of Housewifrie, occupying 42 pages more. 
It is written in verse. Amidst much that is valueless there are 
some useful notices concerning the state of agriculture at the 
time in different parts of England. Hops, which had been intro- 
duced in the early part of the 16th century, and on the culture 
of which a treatise was published in 1574 by Reginald Scott, are 
mentioned as a well-known crop. Buckwheat was sown after 
barley. Hemp and flax are mentioned as common crops. En- 
closures must have been numerous in some counties; and there 
is a very good comparison between " champion (open fields) 
country and several," which Blith afterwards transcribed into 
his Improver Improved. Carrots, cabbages, turnips and rape, 
not yet cultivated in the fields, are mentioned among the herbs 
and roots for the kitchen. There is nothing to be found in Tusser 
about serfs or bondmen, as in Fitzherbert's works. 

In 1577 appeared the Foure Bookes of Husbandry, translated, 
with augmentation, from the work of Conrad Heresbach. Much 
stress is laid on the value of manure, and mention is made of 
clover. 

Fitzherbert, in deploring the gradual discontinuance of the 
practice of marling land, had alluded to the grievance familiar 



392 



AGRICULTURE 



[BRITISH 



in modern times of tenants " who, if they should marl and make 
their holdings much better, fear lest they should be put out, 
or make a great fine or else pay more rent." This subject is 
treated at length in Sir John Norden's Surveyor's Dialogue (ist 
ed. 1607), the next agricultural work demanding notice. The 
author, writing from the landowner's point of view, ascribes the 
rise in rents and the rise in the price of corn 1 to the " emulation " 
of tenants in competing for holdings, a practice implying that 
the agriculture of the period was prosperous. Norden's work 
contains many judicious observations on the " different natures 
of grounds, how they may be employed, how they may be 
bettered, reformed and amended." The famous meadows near 
Salisbury are mentioned, where, when cattle have fed their fill, 
hogs, it is said, " are made fat with the remnant — namely, with 
the knots and sappe of the grasse." " Clouer grasse, or the grasse 
honey suckle " (white clover), is directed to be sown with other 
hay seeds. " Carrot rootes " were then raised in several parts 
of England, and sometimes by farmers. London street and 
stable dung was carried to a distance by water, and appears from 
later writers to have been got for the trouble of removing. 
Leases of 21 years are recommended for persons of small capital 
as better than employing it in purchasing land. The works of 
Gervase Markham, Leonard Mascall, Gabriel Plattes and other 
authors of the first half of the 1 7th century may be passed over, 
the best part jof them being preserved by Blith and Hartlib, who 
are referred to below. 

Sir Richard Weston's Discourse on the Husbandry of Brabant 
and Flanders was published by Hartlib in 1645, and its title 
indicates the source to which England owed much of its sub- 
sequent agricultural advancement. Weston was ambassador 
from England to the elector palatine in 1619, and had the merit 
of being the first who introduced the great clover, as it was then 
called, into English agriculture, about 1652, and probably turnips 
also. Clover thrives best, he says, when you sow it on the 
barrenest ground, such as the worst heath ground in England. 
The ground is to be pared and burnt, and unslacked lime must 
be added to the ashes. It is next to be well ploughed and 
harrowed; and about 10 lb of clover seed must be sown on 
an acre in April or the end of March. If you intend to preserve 
seed, then the second crop must be let stand till it come to a full 
and dead ripeness, and you shall have at the least five bushels 
per acre. Being once sown, it will last five years; the land, when 
ploughed, will yield, three or four years together, rich crops of 
wheat, and after that a crop of oats, with which clover seed is 
to be sown again. It is in itself an excellent manure, Sir Richard 
adds; and so it should be, to enable land to bear this treatment. 
Before 1655 the culture of clover, exactly according to the present 
method, seems to have been well known in England, and it had 
also made its way to Ireland. 

A great many works on agriculture appeared during the 
time of the Commonwealth, of which Walter Blith's Improver 
Improved and Samuel Hartlib's Legacie are the most valuable. 
The first edition of the former was published in 1649, an< i 0I the 
latter in 1651; and both of them were enlarged in subsequent 
editions. In the first edition of the Improver Improved no 
mention is made of clover, nor in the second of turnips, but in the 
third, clover is treated of at some length, and turnips are recom- 
mended as an excellent cattle crop, the culture of which should 
be extended from the kitchen garden to the field. Sir Richard 
Weston must have cultivated turnips before this; for Blith 
says that Sir Richard affirmed to himself that he fed his swine 
with them. They were first given boiled, but afterwards the 
swine came to eat them raw, and would run after the carts, and 
pull them forth as they gathered them — an expression which 
conveys an idea of their being cultivated in the fields. 

Blith's book is the first systematic work in which there are 
some traces of alternate husbandry or the practice of interposing 
clover and turnip between culmiferous crops. He is a great 
enemy to commons and common fields, and to retaining land in 

1 During the 16th century wheat had risen in price, and between 
1606 and 161 8 never fell below 30s. a quarter. At the same time 
wages remained low. 



old pasture, unless it be of the best quality. His description of 
the different kinds of ploughs is interesting; and he justly 
recommends such as were drawn by two horses (some even by 
one horse) in preference to the weighty and clumsy machines 
which required four or more horses or oxen. The following 
passage indicates the contemporary theory of manuring: — " In 
thy tillage are these special opportunities to improve it, either 
by liming, marling, sanding, earthing, mudding, snayl-codding, 
mucking, chalking, pidgeons-dung, hens-dung, hogs-dung or 
by any other means as some by rags, some by coarse wool, by 
pitch marks, and tarry stuff, any oyly stuff, salt and many 
things more, yea indeed any thing almost that hath any liquid- 
ness, foulness, saltness or good moysture in it, is very naturall 
inrichment to almost any sort of land." Blith speaks of an 
instrument which ploughed, sowed and harrowed at the same 
time; and the setting of corn was then a subject of much dis- 
cussion. Blith was a zealous advocate of drainage and holds 
that drains to be efficient must be laid 3 or 4 ft. deep. 
The drainage of the Great Level of the Fens was prosecuted 
during the 17th century, but lack of engineering skill and the 
opposition of the fen-men hindered the reclamation of a now 
fertile region. 

Hartlib's Legacie contains, among some very judicious direc- 
tions, a great deal of rash speculation. Several of the deficiencies 
which the writer complains of in English agriculture must be 
placed to the account of climate, and never have been or can 
be supplied. Some of his recommendations are quite unsuitable 
to the state of the country, and display more of general knowledge 
and good intention than of either the theory or practice of 
agriculture. Among the subjects deserving notice may be 
mentioned the practice of steeping and liming seed corn as a 
preventive of smut; changing every year the species of grain, 
and bringing seed corn from a distance; ploughing down green 
crops as manure; and feeding horses with broken oats and chaff. 
This writer seems to differ a good deal from Blith about the 
advantage of interchanging tillage and pasture. " It were no 
losse to this island," he says, " if that we should not plough at 
all, if so be that we could certainly have corn at a reasonable 
rate, and likewise vent for all our manufactures of wool " ; and 
one reason for this is, that pasture employs more hands than 
tillage, instead of depopulating the country, as was commonly 
imagined. The grout, which he mentions as " coming over to us 
in Holland ships," about which he desires information, was 
probably the same as shelled barley; and mills for manufac- 
turing it were introduced into Scotland from Holland towards 
the beginning of the 18th century. 

Among the other writers previous to the Revolution mention 
must be made of John Ray the botanist and of John Evelyn, 
both men of great talent and research, whose works are still in 
high estimation. 

The first half of the 17th century was a period of agricultural 
activity, partly due, no doubt, to the increase of enclosed farms. 
Marling and liming are again practised, new agricultural imple- 
ments and manures introduced, and the new crops more widely 
used. But the Civil War and the subsequent political disturb- 
ances intervened to prevent the continuance of this progress, and 
the agriculture of the end of the century seems to have relapsed 
into stagnation. 

Of the state of agriculture in Scotland in the 1 6 th and the greater 
part of the 17th century very little is known; no professed 
treatise on the subject appeared till after the Revolution. Scottish 
The south-eastern counties were the earliest improved, agri- 
and yet in 1660 their condition seems to have been very culture oi 
wretched. Ray, who made a tour along the eastern c J' Btury 
coast in that year, says, " We observed little or no 
fallow ground in Scotland; some ley ground we saw, which they 
manured with sea wreck. The men seemed to be very lazy, and 
may be frequently observed to plough in their cloaks. It is the 
fashion of them to wear cloaks when they go abroad, but especi- 
ally on Sundays. They have neither good bread, cheese nor 
drink. They cannot make them, nor will they learn. Their 
butter is very indifferent, and one would wonder how they could 



BRITISH] 



AGRICULTURE 



393 



1688 to 
1760. 



contrive to make it so bad. They use much pottage made of 
coal-wort, which they call kail, sometimes broth of decorticated 
barley. The ordinary country-houses are pitiful cots, built of 
stone and covered with turfs, having in them but one room, many 
of them no chimneys, the windows very small holes and not 
glazed. The ground in the valleys and plains bear very good 
corn, but especially bears barley or bigge, and oats, but rarely 
wheat and rye." 

It is probable that no great change had taken place in Scotland 
from the end of the 15th century, except that tenants gradually 
became possessed of a little stock of their own, instead of having 
their farm stocked by the landlord. " The minority of James V., 
the reign of Mary Stuart, the infancy of her son, and the civil wars 
of her grandson Charles I., were all periods of lasting waste. The 
very laws which were made during successive reigns for protecting 
the tillers of the soil from spoil are the best proofs of the deplor- 
able state of the husbandman." 1 

In the 17th century those laws were made which paved the way 
for an improved system of agriculture in Scotland. By a statute 
of 1633 landholders were enabled to have their tithes valued, 
and to buy them either at nine or six years' purchase, according 
to the nature of the property. The statute of 1685, conferring on 
landlords a power to entail their estates, was indeed of a very 
different tendency in regard to its effects on agriculture. But the 
two Acts in 1695, for the division of commons and separation of 
intermixed properties, facilitated improvements. 

From the Revolution to the accession of George III. the 
progress of agriculture was by no means so considerable as might 
Progress ^ e imagined from the great exportation of corn. It 
ofagricul- is probable that very little improvement had taken 
turetrom place, either in the cultivation of the soil or in the 
management of live stock, from the Restoration down 
to the middle of the 18th century. Clover and turnips 
were confined to a few districts, and at the latter period were 
scarcely cultivated at all by common farmers in the northern 
part of the island. Of the writers of this period, therefore, it is 
necessary to notice only such as describe some improvement in 
the modes of culture, or some extension of the practices that were 
formerly little known. 

In John Houghton's Collections on Husbandry and Trade, a 
periodical work begun in 1681', there is one of the earliest notices of 
turnips being eaten by sheep: — " Some in Essex have their fallow 
after turnips, which feed their sheep in winter, by which means 
the turnips are scooped, and so made capable to hold dews and 
rain water, which, by corrupting, imbibes the nitre of the air, and 
when the shell breaks it runs about and fertilizes. By feeding the 
sheep, the land is dunged as if it had been folded; and those 
turnips, though few or none be carried off for human use, are a 
very excellent improvement, nay, some reckon it so, though they 
only plough the turnips in without feeding." This was written 
in February 1694. Ten years before, John Worlidge, one of his 
correspondents, and the author of the Sy sterna A griculturae (1669) , 
observes, " Sheep fatten very well on turnips, which prove an 
excellent nourishment for them in hard winters when fodder is 
scarce; for they will not only eat the greens, but feed on the roots 
in the ground, and scoop them hollow even to the very skin. Ten 
acres (he adds) sown with clover, turnips, &c, will feed as many 
sheep as one hundred acres thereof would before have done." 

The next writer of note is John Mortimer, whose Whole Art 
of Husbandry, a regular, systematic work of considerable merit, 
was published in 1707. 

From the third edition of Hartlib's Legacie we learn that 
clover was cut green and given to cattle; and it appears that 
this practice of soiling, as it is now called, had become very 
common about the beginning of the 18th century, wherever 
clover was cultivated. Rye-grass was now sown along with it. 
Turnips were hand-hoed and extensively employed in feeding 
sheep and cattle. 

The first considerable improvement in the practice of that 
period was introduced by Jethro Tull, a gentleman of Berkshire, 
who about the year 1701 invented the drill, and whose Horse- 
1 Chalmers' Caledonia, vol. ii. p. 732. 



hoeing Husbandry, published in 1731, exhibits the first decided 
step in advance upon the principles and practices of his pre- 
decessors. Not contented with a careful attention to details, 
Tull set himself* with admirable skill and perseverance, to 
investigate the growth of plants, and thus to arrive at a know- 
ledge of the principles by which the cultivation of field-crops 
should be regulated. Having arrived at the conclusion that the 
food of plants consists of minute particles of earth taken up by 
their rootlets, it followed that the more thoroughly the soil in 
which they grew was disintegrated, the more abundant would 
be the " pasture " (as he called it) to which their fibres would 
have access. He was thus led to adopt that system of sowing 
his crops in rows or drills, so wide apart as to admit of tillage of the 
intervals, both by ploughing and hoeing, being continued until 
they had well-nigh arrived at maturity. Such reliance did he 
place in the pulverization of the soil that he grew as many as 
thirteen crops of wheat on the same field without manure. 

As the distance between his rows appeared much greater than 
was necessary for the range of the roots of the plants, he begins 
by showing that these roots extend much farther than is com- 
monly believed, and then proceeds to inquire into the nature of 
their food. After examining several hypotheses, he decides this 
to be fine particles of earth. The chief and almost the only use 
of dung, he thinks, is to divide the earth, to dissolve " this 
terrestrial matter, which affords nutriment to the mouths of 
vegetable roots"; and this can be done more completely by 
tillage. It is therefore necessary not only to pulverize the soil 
by repeated ploughings before it be seeded, but, as it becomes 
gradually more and more compressed afterwards, recourse must 
be had to tillage while the plants are growing; and this is hoeing, 
which also destroys the weeds that would deprive the plants of 
their nourishment. 

The leading features of Tull's husbandry are his practice of 
laying the land into narrow ridges of 5 or 6 ft., and upon 
the middle of «hese drilling one, two, or three rows, distant 
from cne another about 7 in. when there were three, and 10 in. 
when only two. The distance of the plants on one ridge from 
those on the contiguous one he called an interval; the distance 
between the rows on the same ridge, a space or partition; the 
former was stirred repeatedly by the horse-hoe, the latter by 
the hand-hoe. 

" Hoeing," he says, " may be divided into deep, which is our 
horse-hoeing; and shallow, which is the English hand-hoeing; 
and also the sh<ulow horse-hoeing used in some places betwixt 
rows, where the intervals are very narrow, as 16 or 18 inches. 
This is but an imitation of the hand-hoe, or a succenadeum to 
it, and can neither supply the use of dung nor fallow, and may 
be properly called scratch-hoeing." But in his mode of forming 
ridges his practice seems to have been original; his implements, 
especially his drill, display much ingenuity; and his claim to 
the title of founder of the present horse-hoeing husbandry of 
Great Britain seems indisputable. 

Contemporary with Tull was Charles, 2nd Viscount To wnshend, 
a typical representative of the large landowners to whom the 
strides made by agriculture in the 18th century were due. The 
class to which he belonged was the only one which could afford 
to initiate improvements. The bulk of the land was still farmed 
by small tenants on the old common-field system, which made 
it impossible for the individual to adopt a new crop rotation and 
hindered innovation of every kind. On the other hand, the small 
farmers who occupied separated holdings were deterred from 
improving by the fear of a rise in rent. Townshend's belief in 
the growing of turnips gained him the nickname of " Turnip 
Townshend." In their cultivation he adopted Tull's practice - 
of drilling and horse-hoeing, and he was also the founder of the 
Norfolk or four-course system, the first of those rotations which 
dispense with the necessity of a summer-fallow and provide 
winter-keep for live-stock (see below, Rotation of Crops). The 
spread of these principles in Norfolk made it, according to Arthur 
Young (writing in 1770), one of the best cultivated counties in 
England. In the latter half of the century another Norfolk 
farmer, Thomas William Coke of Holkham, earl of Leicester, 



394 



AGRICULTURE 



[BRITISH 



(1752-1842), figures as a pioneer of high-farming. He was one 
of the. first to use oil-cake and bone-manure, to distinguish the 
feeding values of grasses, to appreciate to the full the beneficial 
effects of stock on light lands and to realize the value of long 
leases as an incentive to good farming. 

Of the progress of the art in Scotland, till towards the end of 
the 17th century, we are almost entirely ignorant. The first 
.. work, written by James Donaldson, was printed in 

culture in 1697, under the title of Husbandry Anatomized; or, 
Scotland a n Inquiry into the Present Manner of Tilling and 
,atb " 18tn Manuring the Ground in Scotland. It appears from 
this treatise that the state of the art was not more 
advanced at that time in North Britain than it had been 
in England in the time of Fitzherbert. Farms were divided 
into infield and outfield; corn crops followed one another with- 
out the intervention of fallow, cultivated herbage or turnips, 
though something is said about fallowing the outfield; en- 
closures were very rare; the tenantry had not begun to emerge 
from a state of great poverty and depression; and the wages of 
labour, compared with the price of corn, were much lower than 
at present, though that price, at least in ordinary years, must 
appear extremely moderate in our times. Leases for a term of 
years, however, were not uncommon; but the want of capital 
rendered it impossible for the tenantry to attempt any spirited 
improvements. 

The next work on the husbandry of Scotland is The Country- 
man's Rudiments, or an Advice to the Farmers in East Lothian, 
how to labour and improve their Grounds, said to have been written 
by John Hamilton, 2nd Lord Belhaven about the time of the 
Union, and reprinted in 1723. The author bespeaks the favour 
of those to whom he addresses himself in the following significant 
terms: — " Neither shall I affright you with hedging, ditching, 
marling, chalking, paring and burning, draining, watering and 
such like, which are all very good improvements indeed, and 
very agreeable with the soil and situation of East Lothian, but 
I know ye cannot bear as yet a crowd of improvements, this 
being only intended to initiate you in the true method and 
principles of husbandry." The farm-rooms in East Lothian, 
as in other districts, were divided into infield and outfield. 

" The infield (where wheat is sown) is generally divided by the 
tenant into four divisions or breaks, as they call them, viz. one 
of wheat, one of barley, one of pease and one of oats, so that the 
wheat is sowd after the pease, the barley after the wheat and the 
oats after the barley. The outfield land is ordinarily made use of 
promiscuously for feeding of their cows, horse, sheep and oxen; 'tis 
also dunged by their sheep who lay in earthen folds; and sometimes, 
when they have much of it, they fauch or fallow a part of it yearly." 

Under this management the produce seems to have been 
three times the seed; and yet, says the writer, "if in East 
Lothian they did not leave a higher stubble than in other places 
of the kingdom, their grounds would be in a much worse con- 
dition than at present they are, though bad enough." " A good 
crop of corn makes a good stubble, and a good stubble is the 
equalest mucking that is." Among the advantages of enclosures, 
he observes, " you will gain much more labour from your ser- 
vants, a great part of whose time was taken up in gathering 
thistles and other garbage for their horses to feed upon in their 
stables; and thereby the great trampling and pulling up and 
other destruction of the corns while they are yet tender will 
be prevented." Potatoes and turnips are recommended to be 
sown i n the yard (kitchen-garden) . Clover does not seem to have 
been in use. Rents were paid in corn; and for the largest farm, 
which he thinks should employ no more than two ploughs, the 
rent was about six chalders of victual " when the ground is very 
good, and four in that which is not so good. But I am most fully 
convinced they should take long leases or tacks, that they may 
not be straitened with time in the improvement of their rooms; 
and this is profitable both for master and tenant." 

Such was the state of the husbandry of Scotland in the early 
part of the 18th century. The first attempts at improvement 
cannot be traced farther back than 1723, when a number of 
landholders formed themselves into a society, under the title 
of the Society of Improvers in the Knowledge of Agriculture, in 



Scotland. John, 2nd earl of Stair, one of their most active 
members, is said to have been the first who cultivated turnips in 
that country. The Select Transactions of this society were 
collected and published in 1743 by Robert Maxwell, who took a 
large part in its proceedings. It is evident from this book 
that the society had exerted itself with success in intro- 
ducing cultivated herbage and turnips, as well as in improving 
the former methods of culture. But there is reason to believe 
that the influence of the example of its numerous members did 
not extend to the common tenantry, who not unnaturally were 
reluctant to adopt the practices of those by whom farming was 
perhaps regarded as primarily a source of pleasure rather than 
of profit. Though this society, the earliest probably in the 
United Kingdom, soon counted upwards of 300 members, it 
existed little more than 20 years. 

In the introductory paper in Maxwell's collection we are told 
that — 

" The practice of draining, enclosing, summer fallowing, sowing 
flax, hemp, rape, turnip and grass seeds, planting cabbages after, 
and potatoes with, the plough, in fields of great extent, is introduced ; 
and that, according to the general opinion, more corn grows now 
yearly where it was never known to grow before, these twenty years 
last past, than perhaps a sixth of all that the kingdom was in use 
to produce at any time before." 

In 1757 Maxwell issued another work entitled The Practical 
Husbandman; being a collection of Miscellaneous papers on 
Husbandry, &c. In it the greater part of the'Select Transactions 
is republished, with a number of new papers, among which an 
Essay on the Husbandry of Scotland, with a proposal for the im- 
provement of it, is the most valuable. In this he lays it down 
as a rule that it is bad husbandry to take two crops of grain 
successively, which marks a considerable progress in the know- 
ledge of modern husbandry; though he adds that in Scotland 
the best husbandmen after a fallow take a crop of wheat; after 
the wheat, peas; then barley, and then oats; and after that 
they fallow again. The want of enclosures was still a matter of 
complaint. The ground continued to be cropped so long as it 
produced two seeds; the best farmers were contented with four 
seeds, which was more than the general produce. 

The gradual advance in the price of farm produce soon after 
the year 1760, occasioned by the increase of popula- 
tion and of wealth derived from manufactures and ms 
commerce, gave a powerful stimulus to rural industry, 
augmented agricultural capital and called forth a more skilful and 
enterprising race of farmers. 

A more rational system of cropping now began to take the 
place of the thriftless and barbarous practice of sowing succes- 
sive crops of corn until the land was utterly exhausted, and then 
leaving it foul with weeds to recover its power by an indefinite 
period of rest. Green crops, such as turnips, clover and rye 
grass, began to be alternated with grain crops, whence the name 
alternate husbandry. 

The writings of Arthur Young (q.v.), secretary to the Board 
of Agriculture, describe the transition from the old to the new 
agriculture. In many places turnips and clover were still 
unknown or ignored. Large districts still clung to the old 
common-field system, to the old habits of ploughing with 
teams of four or eight, and to slovenly methods of cultivation. 
Young's condemnation of these survivals was as pronounced as 
his support of the methods of the large farmers to whom he 
ascribed the excellence of the husbandry of Kent, Norfolk and 
Essex. He realized that with the enclosure of the waste lands 
and the absorption of small into large holdings, the common- 
field farmer must migrate to the town or become a hired labourer; 
but he also realized that to feed a rapidly growing industrial 
population, the land must be improved by draining, marling, 
manuring and the use of better implements, in short by the 
investment of the capital which the yeoman farmer, content to 
feed himself and his own family, did not possess. The enlarge- 
ment of farms, and in Scotland the letting of them under leases 
for a considerable term of years, continued to be a marked feature 
in the agricultural progress of the country until the end of the 
century, and is to be regarded both as a cause and a consequence 



BRITISH] 



AGRICULTURE 



395 



of that progress. The passing of some 3500 enclosure bills, affect- 
ing between 5 and s| million acres, during the reign of George 
III., before which the whole number was between 200 and 250, 
shows how rapidly the break-up of the common-field husbandry 
and the cultivation of new land now proceeded. The disastrous 
American War for a time interfered with the national prosperity; 
but with the return of peace in 1783 the cultivation of the 
country made more rapid progress. The quarter of a century 
immediately following 1760 is memorable for the introduction 
of various important improvements. It was during this period 
that the genius of Robert Bakewell produced an extraordinary 
change in the character of our more important breeds of live 
stock, more especially by the perfecting of a new race of sheep — 
the well-known Leicesters. BakewelPs fame as a breeder was 
for a time enhanced by the improvement which he effected on 
the Long-homed cattle, then the prevailing breed of the midland 
counties of England. These, however, were ere long rivalled 
and afterwards superseded by the Shorthorn or Durham breed, 
which the brothers Charles and Robert Colling obtained from 
the useful race of cattle that had long existed in the valley of 
the Tees, by applying to them the principle of breeding which 
Bakewell had already established. To this period also belong 
George and Matthew Culley — the former a pupil of Bakewell — 
who left their paternal property on the bank of the Tees and 
settled on the Northumbrian side of the Tweed, bringing with 
them the valuable breeds of live stock and improved husbandry 
of their native district. The improvements introduced by these 
energetic and skilful farmers spread rapidly, and exerted a most 
beneficial influence upon the border counties. 

From 1784 to 1795 improvements advanced with steady steps. 
This period was distinguished for the adoption and working 
out of ascertained improvements. Small's swing plough and 
Andrew Meikle's threshing-machine, although invented some 
years before this, were now perfected and brought into general 
use, to the great furtherance of agriculture. Two important 
additions were about this time made to the field crops, viz. the 
Swedish turnip and potato oat. The latter was accidentally 
discovered in 1788, and both soon came into general cultivation. 
In the same year Merino sheep were introduced by George III., 
who was a zealous farmer. For a time this breed attracted much 
attention, and sanguine expectations were entertained that it 
would prove of national importance. Its unfitness for the pro- 
duction of mutton, and increasing supplies of fine clothing wool 
from other countries, soon led to its total rejection. 

In Scotland the opening up of the country by the construction 
of practicable roads, and the enclosing and subdividing of farms 
by hedge and ditch, was now in active progress. The former 
admitted of the general use of wheel-carriages, of the ready con- 
veyance of produce to markets, and in particular of the extended 
use of lime, the application of which was immediately followed 
by a great increase of produce. The latter, besides its more 
obvious advantages, speedily freed large tracts of country from 
stagnant water and their inhabitants from ague, and prepared 
the way for the underground draining which soon after began to 
be practised. Dawson of Frogden in Roxburghshire is believed 
to have been the first who grew turnips as a field crop to any 
extent. It is on record that as early as 1764 he had 100 acres of 
drilled turnips on his farm in one year. An Act passed in 1770, 
which relaxed the rigour of strict entails and afforded power to 
landlords to grant leases and otherwise improve their estates, had 
a beneficial effect on Scottish agriculture. 

The husbandry of the country was thus steadily improving, 
when suddenly the whole of Europe became involved in the wars 
of the French Revolution. In 1795, under the joint operation of 
a deficient harvest and the diminution in foreign supplies of 
grain owing to outbreak of war, the price of wheat, which, for the 
twenty preceding years, had been under 50s. a quarter, suddenly 
rose to 81s. 6d., and in the following year reached 96s. In 1797 
the fear of foreign invasion led to a panic and run upon the banks, 
in which emergency the Bank Restriction Act, suspending cash 
payment, was passed, and ushered in a system of unlimited credit 
transactions. Under the unnatural stimulus of these extra- 



ordinary events, every branch of industry extended with un- 
exampled rapidity. But in nothing was this so apparent as in 
agriculture; the high prices of produce holding out a great 
inducement to improve lands then arable, to reclaim others that 
had previously lain waste, and to bring much pasture-land under 
the plough. Nor did this increased tillage interfere with the 
increase of live stock, as the green crops of the alternate hus- 
bandry more than compensated for the diminished pasturage. 
This extraordinary state of matters lasted from 1795 to 1814, 
the prices of produce even increasing towards the close of that 
period. The average price of wheat for the whole period 
was 89s. 7d. per quarter; but for the last five years it was 
107s., and in 1812 it reached 126s. 6d. The agriculture of Great 
Britain, as a whole, advanced with rapid strides during this 
period; but nowhere was the change so great as in Scotland. 
Indeed, its progress there, during these twenty years, is probably 
without parallel in the history of any other country. This is 
accounted for by a concurrence of circumstances. Previous to 
this period the husbandry of Scotland was still in a backward 
state as compared with the best districts of England, where many 
practices, only of recent introduction in the north, had been in 
general use for generations. This disparity made the subsequent 
contrast the more striking. The land in Scotland was now, with 
trifling exceptions, let on leases for terms varying from twenty to 
thirty years, and in farms of sufficient size to employ at the least 
two or three ploughs. The unlimited issues of government paper 
and the security afforded by these leases induced the Scottish 
banks to afford every facility to landlords and tenants to embark 
capital in the improvement of the land. The substantial educa- 
tion supplied by the parish schools, of which nearly the whole 
population could then avail themselves, had diffused through all 
ranks such a measure of intelligence as enabled them promptly 
to discern and skilfully and energetically to take advantage of 
this spring-tide of prosperity, and to profit by the agricultural 
information now plentifully furnished by means of the Bath and 
West of England Society, established in 1777; the Highland 
Society, instituted in 1784; and the National Board of Agricul- 
ture, in 1793. 

The restoration of peace to Europe, and the re-enactment of 
the Corn Laws in 181 5, mark the beginning of another era in the 
history of agriculture. The sudden return to peace- taigt 
prices was followed by a time of severe depression, low 18 fs. 
wages, diminished rents and bad farming. The fall 
in prices was aggravated, first by the unpropitious weather and 
deficient harvest of the years 1816, 1817, and still more by the 
passing in 18 19 of the bill restoring cash payments, which, coming 
into operation in 1821, caused serious embarrassment to all 
persons who had entered into engagements at a depreciated 
currency, which had now to be met with the lower prices of an 
enhanced one. The frequency of select-committees and commis- 
sions, which sat in 1814, 1821 and 1822, 1833 and 1836, testifies 
to the gravity of the crisis. The years 1830-1833 are especially 
memorable for a disastrous outbreak of sheep-rot and for agrarian 
outrages, caused partly by the dislike of the labourers to the 
introduction of agricultural machines. 

During this period of depression, which lasted till the 'forties, 
want of confidence prevented any general improvement in 
agricultural methods. At the same time, certain developments 
destined to exercise considerable influence in later times are 
to be noted. Before the close of the 18th century, and during 
the first quarter of the 19th, a good deal had been done in the 
way of draining the land, either by open ditches or by James 
Elkington's system of deep covered drains. In 1834 James 
Smith of Deanston promulgated his system of thorough draining 
and deep ploughing, the adoption of which immeasurably im- 
proved the clay lands of the country. The early years of the 
reign of Queen Victoria witnessed the strengthening of the union 
between agriculture and chemistry. The Board of Agriculture 
in 1803 had commissioned Sir Humphry Davy to deliver a 
course of lectures on the connexion of chemistry with vegetable 
physiology. In 1840 the appearance of Chemistry in its Appli- 
cation to Agriculture and Physiology by Justus von Liebig set 



39^ 



AGRICULTURE 



[BRITISH 



on foot a movement in favour of scientific husbandry, the most 
notable outcome of which was the establishment by Sir John 
Bennet Lawes in 1843 of the experimental station of Rotham- 
sted. Since Blith's time bone was the one new fertilizer that 
had come into use. Nitrate of soda, Peruvian guano and 
superphosphate of lime in the form of bones dissolved by sulphuric 
acid were now added to the list of manures, and the practice 
of analysing soils became more general. Manual labour in 
farming operations began to be superseded by the use of drills, 
hay-makers and horse-rakes, chaff-cutters and root-pulpers. 
The reaping-machine, invented in 181 2 by John Common, 
improved upon by the Rev. Patrick Bell in England and by 
Cyrus H. McCormick and others in America, and finally perfected 
about 1879 by the addition of an efficient self-binding apparatus, 
is the most striking example of the application of mechanics to 
agriculture. Improvements in the plough, harrow and roller 
were introduced, adapting those implements to different soils 
and purposes. The steam-engine first took the place of horses 
as a threshing power in 1803, but it was not until after 1850 that 
it was applied to the plough and cultivator. The employment 
of agricultural machines received considerable impetus from the 
Great Exhibition of 1851. The much-debated Corn Laws, after 
undergoing various modifications, and proving the fruitful 
source of business uncertainty, social discontent and angry 
partisanship, were finally abolished in 1846, although the act 
was not consummated until three years later. Several other 
acts of the legislature passed during this period exerted a bene- 
ficial influence on agriculture. Of these, the first in date and 
importance is the Tithe Commutation Act of 1836. Improve- 
ment was also stimulated by the Public Money Drainage 
Acts 1846-1856, under which government was empowered to 
advance money on certain conditions for the improvement of 
estates. Additional facilities were granted by the act passed 
in 1848 for disentailing estates, and for burdening such as are 
entailed with the share of the cost of certain specified im- 
provements. 

Meanwhile much had been done in the organization of agri- 
cultural knowledge. Mention has already been made of the 
institution of the Highland Society and the National Board of 
Agriculture. These institutions were the means of collecting 
a vast amount of statistical and general information connected 
with agriculture, and by their publications and premiums made 
known the practices of the best-farmed districts «nd encouraged 
their adoption elsewhere. These associations were soon aided 
in their important labours by numerous local societies which 
sprang up in all parts of the kingdom. After a highly useful 
career, under the presidency till 1813 of Sir John Sinclair, the 
Board of Agriculture was dissolved in 1819, but left in its statis- 
tical account, county surveys and other documents much 
interesting and valuable information regarding the agriculture 
of the period. In 1800 the original Farmers' Magazine came 
into existence under the editorship of Robert Brown of 
Markle, the author of the well-known treatise on Rural Affairs. 
The Highland Society having early extended its operations to 
the whole of Scotland, by and by made a corresponding addition 
to its title, and as the Highland and Agricultural Society of 
Scotland gradually extended its operations. In 1828, shortly 
after the discontinuance of the Farmers' Magazine, its Prize 
Essays and Transactions began to be issued statedly in connexion 
with the Quarterly Journal of Agriculture. This society early 
began to hold a great show of live stock, implements, &c. In 
1842 certain Midlothian tenant-farmers had the merit of 
originating an Agricultural Chemistry Association (the first of 
its kind), by which funds were raised for the purpose of conduct- 
ing such investigations as the title of the society implies. After 
a successful trial of a few years this association was dissolved, 
transferring its functions to the Highland and Agricultural 
Society. 

In England the Agricultural Society was founded in 1838, 
with the motto " Practice with Science," and shortly afterwards 
incorporated by royal charter. In 1845 the Royal Agricultural 
College at Cirencester was incorporated. This era of revival 



was not, however, without its calamities. The foot-and-mouth 
disease first appeared about 1840, having been introduced, as is 
supposed, by foreign cattle. It spread rapidly over the country, 
affecting all domesticated animals except horses, and although 
seldom attended by fatal results, caused everywhere great alarm 
and loss. It was soon followed by the more terrible lung-disease, 
or pleuro-pneumonia. In 1 86 5 the rinderpest, or steppe murrain, 
originating amongst the vast herds of the Russian steppes, had 
spread westward over Europe, until it was brought to London 
by foreign cattle. Several weeks elapsed before the true char- 
acter of the disease was known, and in this brief space it had 
already been carried by animals purchased in Smithfield market 
to all parts of the country. After causing the most frightful 
losses, it was at last stamped out by the resolute slaughter of all 
affected animals and of all that had been in contact with them. 
Severe as were the losses in flocks and herds from these imported 
diseases, they were eclipsed by the ravages of the mysterious 
potato blight, which, first appearing in 1845, pervaded the whole 
of Europe, and in Ireland especially proved the precursor of 
famine and pestilence. 

A short period of low prices followed the repeal of the Corn 
Laws, wheat averaging only 38s. 6d. a quarter in 1851, but the 
years from 1852 to 1875 were the most prosperous of the century. 
The letters written by Sir James Caird to The Times during 
1850, and republished in 1852 under the title English Agriculture 
in 1850-1851, give a general review of English agriculture at 
the time. The scientific and mechanical improvements of the 
first half of the century were widely adopted, while the prices 
of the protectionist period showed little decline. Amelioration 
in all breeds of domesticated animals was manifested, not so 
much in the production of individual specimens of high merit 
as in the diffusion of these and other good breeds over the 
country, and in the improved quality of live stock as a whole. 
The fattening of animals was conducted on more scientific 
principles. Increased attention was successfully bestowed on 
the improvement of field crops. Improved varieties, obtained 
by cross-impregnation either naturally or artificially brought 
about, were carefully propagated and generally adopted, and in- 
creased attention was bestowed on the cultivation of the natural 
grasses. The most important additions to the list of field crops 
were Italian rye-grass, winter beans, white Belgian carrot and 
alsike clover. 

The last quarter of the 19th century proved, however, a fateful 
period for British agriculture. The great future that seemed 
to await the application of steam power to the tillage 
of the soil proved illusory. The clay soils of England, A«»*n/- , 
the latent fertility of which was to be brought into js7S. 
play in a fashion that should mightily augment the 
home-grown supplies of food, remained intractable, and the 
extent of land devoted to the cultivation of corn crops, instead 
of expanding, diminished in a marked degree. British farmers 
of long experience look back to 1874 as the last of the really 
good years, and consider that the palmy days of British agri- 
culture began to dwindle at about that time. The shadow of the 
approaching depression had already fallen upon the land before 
the year 1875 had run its course, and the outlook became ominous 
as the decade of the 'seventies neared its close. One memorable 
feature was associated with 1877 in that this was the last year 
in which the dreaded cattle plague (rinderpest) made its appear- 
ance in England. The same year, 1877, was the last also in 
which the annual average price of English wheat (then 56s. 9d.) 
exceeded 50s. a quarter. With declining prices for farm produce 
came that year of unhappy memory, 1879, when persistent rains 
and an almost sunless summer ruined the crops and reduced 
many farmers to a state of destitution. Much of the grain was 
never harvested, whilst owing mainly to the excessive floods 
there commenced an outbreak of liver-rot in sheep, due to the 
ravages of the fluke parasite. This continued for several years, 
and the mortality was so great that its adverse effects upon the 
ovine population of the country were still perceptible ten years 
afterwards. A fall in rents was the necessary sequel of the 
agricultural distress, to inquire into which a royal commission 



BRITISH] 



AGRICULTURE 



397 



was appointed in 1879, under the chairmanship of the duke of 
Richmond and Gordon. Its report, published in 1882, testified 
to " the great extent and intensity of the distress which has 
fallen upon the agricultural community. Owners and occupiers 
have alike suffered from it. No description of estate or tenure 
has been exempted. The owner in fee and life tenant, the 
occupier, whether of large or of small holding, whether under 
lease, or custom, or agreement, or the provisions of the Agricul- 
tural Holdings Act — all without distinction have been involved 
in a general calamity." The two most prominent causes assigned 
for the depression were bad seasons and foreign competition, 
aggravated by the increased cost of production and the heavy 
losses of live stock. Abundant evidence was forthcoming as 
to the extent to which agriculture had been injuriously affected 
"by an unprecedented succession of bad seasons." As regards 
the pressure of foreign competition, it was stated to be greatly 
in excess of the anticipations of the supporters, and of the 
apprehensions of the opponents of the repeal of the Corn Laws. 
Whereas formerly the farmer was to some extent compensated 
by a higher price for a smaller yield, in recent years he had had 
to compete with an unusually large supply at greatly reduced 
prices. On the other hand, he had enjoyed the advantage of 
an extended supply of feeding-stuffs — such as maize, linseed- 
cake and cotton-cake — and of artificial manures imported from 
abroad. The low price ofagriculturalproduce, beneficial though 
it might be to the general community, had lessened the ability 
of the land to bear the proportion of taxation which had hereto- 
fore been imposed upon it. The legislative outcome of the 
findings of this royal commission was the Agricultural Holdings 
Act 1883, a measure which continued in force in its entirety 
till iqoi, when a new act came into operation. 

The apparently hopeless outlook for corn-growing compelled 
farmers to cast about for some other means of subsistence, and 
to rely more than they had hitherto done upon the possibilities 
of stock-breeding. It was in particular the misfortunes of the 
later 'seventies that gave the needed fillip to that branch of 
stock-farming concerned with the production of milk, butter 
and cheese, and from this period may be said to date the revival 
of the dairying industry, which received a powerful impetus 
through the introduction of the centrifugal cream separator, 
and was fostered by the British Dairy Farmers' Association 
(formed in 1875). The generally wet character of the seasons 
in 1879 and the two or three years following was mainly respon- 
sible for the high prices of meat, so that the supplies of fresh beef 
and mutton from Australia which now began to arrive found a 
ready market, and the trade in imported fresh meat which was 
thus commenced has practically continued to expand ever since. 
The great losses arising from spoilt hay crops served to stimulate 
experimental inquiry into the method of preserving green fodder 
known as ensilage, with the result that the system eventually 
became successfully incorporated in the ordinary routine of 
agricultural practice. A contemporaneous effort in the direction 
of drying hay by artificial means led to nothing of practical 
importance. By 1882 the cry as to land going out of cultivation 
became loud and general, and the migration of the rural popula- 
tion into the towns in search of work continued unchecked (see 
below, Agricultural Population). In 1883 foot-and-mouth disease 
was terribly rampant amongst the herds and flocks of Great 
Britain, and was far more prevalent than it has ever been since. 
It was about this time that the first experiments were made 
(in Germany) with basic slag, a material which had hitherto 
been regarded as a worthless by-product of steel manufacture. 
A year or two later field trials were begun in England, with the 
final result that basic slag has become recognized as a valuable 
source of phosphorus for growing crops, and is now in constant 
demand for application to the soil as a fertilizer. 

In 1883 the veterinary department of the Privy Council — 
which had been constituted in 1865 when the country was 
ravaged by cattle plague — was abolished by order in council, 
and the " Agricultural Department " was substituted, but no 
alteration was effected in the work of the department, so far as 
it relattd to animals. In 1889 the Board of Agriculture (for 



Great Britain) was formed under an act of parliament of that 
year (see Agriculture, Board or). The election took place 
in the same year (1889) of the first county councils, and the 
allotment to them of various sums of money under the Local 
Taxation (Customs and Excise) Act 1890 enabled local provision 
to be made for the promotion of technical instruction in agri- 
culture (see below, Agricultural Education). It was about this 
time that the value of a mixture of lime and sulphate of copper 
(bouillie bordelaise), sprayed in solution upon the growing plants, 
came to be recognized as a check upon the ravages of potato 
disease. 

The general experience of the decade of the 'eighties was 
that of disappointing summers, harsh winters, falling prices, 
declining rents and the shrinkage of land values. It is true that 
one season of the series, that of 1887, was hot and droughty, 
but the following summer was exceedingly wet. Nevertheless, 
the decade closed more hopefully than it opened, and found 
farmers taking a keener interest in grass land, in live stock and 
in dairying. Cattle-breeders did well in 1889, but sheep-breeders 
fared better; on the other hand, owing to receding prices, corn- 
growers were more disheartened than ever. With the incoming 
of the last decade of the century there seemed to be some 
justifiable hopes of the dawn, of better times, but they were 
speedily doomed to disappointment. In 1891 excessively heavy 
autumn rains washed the arable soils to such an extent that the 
next season's corn crops were below average. Wheat in parti- 
cular was a poor crop in 1892, and the low yield was associated 
with falling prices due to large imports. The hay crop was very 
inferior, and in some cases it was practically ruined. This gave 
a stimulus to the trade in imported hay, which rose from 61,237 
tons in 1892 to 263,050 tons in 1893, and despite some large 
home-grown crops in certain subsequent years (1897 and 1898) 
this expansion has never since been wholly lost. 

The misfortunes of 1892 proved to be merely a preparation 
for the disasters of 1893, in which year occurred the most de- 
structive drought within living memory. Its worst effects were 
seen upon the light land farms of England, and so deplorable 
was the position that a royal commission on agricultural de- 
pression was appointed in September of that year under the 
chairmanship of Mr Shaw Lefevre (afterwards Lord Eversley). 
Thus, within the last quarter of the 19th century — and, as a 
matter of fact, only fourteen years apart — two royal commissions 
on agriculture were appointed, the one in a year of memorable 
flood, 1879, and the other in a year of disastrous drought, 1893. 
The report of the commission of 1893 was issued in March 1896. 
Amongst its chief recommendations were those relating to 
amendments in the Agricultural Holdings Acts, and to tithe rent- 
charge, railway rates, damage by game, sale of adulterated 
products, and sale of imported goods (meat, for example) as 
home produce. Two legislative enactments arose out of the 
work of this commission. In the majority report it was stated 
" that, in order to place agricultural lands in their right position 
as compared with other ratable properties, it is essential that 
they should be assessed to all local rates in a reduced propor- 
tion of their ratable value." The Agricultural Rates Act 1896 
gave effect to this recommendation. Its objects were to relieve 
agricultural land from half the local rates, and to provide the 
means of making good out of imperial funds the deficiency in local 
taxation caused thereby. It was provided that the act should 
continue in force only till the 31st of March 1902, but a further 
act in 1901 extended the period by four years, and in 1905 its 
operation was extended to the 31st of March 1910. The other 
measure arising out of the report of the royal commission of 1893 
was the Agricultural Holdings Act 1900. This was an amending 
act and not a consolidating act; consequently it had to be read 
as if incorporated into the already existing acts. As affecting 
agricultural practice there were three noteworthy improvements 
in respect of the making of which, without the consent of or 
notice to his landlord, a tenant might claim compensation — (1) 
the consumption on the holding "by horses, other than those 
regularly employed on the holding," of corn, cake or other 
feeding-stuff not produced on the holding; (2) the " consumption 



398 



AGRICULTURE 



[BRITISH 



on the holding by cattle, sheep, or pigs, or by horses other than 
those regularly employed on the holding, of corn proved by 
satisfactory evidence to have been produced and consumed on 
the holding "; (3) " laying down temporary pasture with clover, 
grass, lucerne, sainfoin or other seeds sown more than two years 
prior to the determination of the tenancy." A further act was 
passed in 1906 (the Agricultural Holdings Act 1906) which im- 
proved the tenant's position in respect of freedom of cropping, 
disposal of produce and compensation for disturbance. 

After 1894, in which year the brilliant prospects of a bountiful 
harvest were ultimately extinguished by untimely and heavy 
rains, all the remaining seasons of the closing decade of the 19th 
century were dominated by drought. A fact that was amply 
illustrated, moreover, is that the period of incidence of a drought 
is not less important than its duration, and the same is true of 
abnormal rainfall. A spring drought, a summer drought, an 
autumn drought, each has its distinctive characteristics in so far 
as the effect upon the crops is concerned. The hot drought of 
1893 extended over the spring and summer months, but there 
was an abundant rainfall in the autumn; correspondingly there 
was an unprecedentedly bad yield of corn and hay crops, but a 
moderately fair yield of the main root crops (turnips and swedes). 
In 1899 the drought became most intense in the autumn after 
the corn crops had been harvested, but during the chief period, 
of growth of the root crops; correspondingly the corn crops of 
that year rank'Very well amongst the crops of the decade, but 
the yield of turnips and swedes was the worst on record. It is 
quite possible for a hot dry season to be associated with a large 
yield of corn, provided the drought is confined to a suitable period, 
as was the case in 1896 and still more so in 1898; the English 
wheat crops in those years were probably the biggest in yield 
per acre that had been harvested since 1868, which is always 
looked back upon as a remarkable year for wheat. The drought 
of 1898 was interrupted by copious rains in June, and these 
falling onNa warm soil led to a rapid growth of grass and, as 
measured by yield per acre, an exceedingly heavy crop of hay. 

With the exceptions of 1891 and 1894, every year in the period 
1 891-1900 was stricken by drought. The two meteorological 
events of the decade which will probably live longest in the 
recollection were, however, the terrible drought of 1893, result- 
ing in a fodder famine in the succeeding winter, and the severe 
frost of ten weeks' duration at the beginning of 1895. Between 
these two occurrences came the disastrous decline in the value 
of grain in the autumn of 1894, when the weekly average price 
of English wheat fell to the record minimum of 17s. 6d. per im- 
perial quarter. As a consequence, the extent of land devoted 
to wheat in the British Isles receded in 1895 to less than 15 
million acres. The year 1903 was memorable for a very heavy 
rainfall, comparable though not equal in its disastrous effects to 
that of 1879. Successful trials of sulphate of copper solution 
as a means of destroying charlock in corn crops took place in 
the years 1 898-1 900. Charlock is a most persistent cruciferous 
weed, but if sprayed when young with the solution named it is 
killed, the corn plants being uninjured. In 1901 the formation 
of the Agricultural Organization Society marked the first sys- 
tematic attempt to organize co-operation among the farmers 
of Great Britain. In the subsequent years the principle, which 
had already made great progress in Ireland, began to obtain a 
hold in England and Wales, where, in 1906, there were 145 local 
co-operative societies with a turn-over of £350,000. 

Amongst legislative measures of importance to agriculturists 
mention should be made, in addition to those that have been 
referred to, of the Tithe Rent-charge Recovery Act 1891, which 
transfers the liability for payment of tithe from the occupier to 
the owner. In the same year was passed the Markets and Fairs 
(Weighing of Cattle) Act. The object of the Small Holdings Act 
1892 was to facilitate the acquisition of small agricultural hold- 
ings. It provided that a county council might acquire any suit- 
able land, with the object of allotting from one to fifty acres, 
or, if more than fifty acres, of an annual value not exceeding £50, 
to persons who desired to buy, and would themselves cultivate, 
the holdings. If, owing to proximity to a town or otherwise, the 



prospective value were too high, the council might hire such land 
for the purpose of letting it. (See Allotments and Small Hold- 
ings for this and other acts.) The Fertilizers and Feeding Stuffs 
Act 1893 compelled sellers of fertilizers {i.e. manures), manu- 
factured or imported, to state the percentage of the nitrogen, of 
the soluble and insoluble phosphates, and of the potash in each 
article sold, and this statement was to have the effect of a war- 
ranty. Similar stringent conditions applied as regards the sale of 
feeding-stuffs for live stock. The Fertilizers and Feeding Stuffs 
Act 1906, amending and re-enacting the act of 1893, provided 
for the compulsory appointment by county councils of official 
samplers. It also provides penalties for breaches of duty by the 
seller, but grants him protection in cases where he is not morally 
responsible. The Finance Act of 1894, with its great changes in 
the death duties, overshadowed all other acts of that year both in 
its immediate effects and in its far-reaching consequences. The 
Copyhold Consolidation Act 1894 supersedes six previous copy- 
hold statutes, but does not effect any alteration in the law concern- 
ing enfranchisement. The Diseases of Animals Act 1 896 provided 
for the compulsory slaughter of imported live stock at the place 
of landing. The Light Railways Act and the Locomotives on 
Highways Act were added to the statute book in 1896, and 
various clauses in the Finance Act effected reforms in respect of 
the death duties, the land-tax, farmers' income-tax and the beer 
duty. The Chaff-cutting Machines (Accidents) Act 1897 is a 
measure very similar in its intention to the Threshing Machines 
Act 1878, and provides for the automatic prevention of accidents 
to persons in charge of chaff-cutting machines. The Sale of Food 
and Drugs Act 1899 has special reference in its earlier sections 
to the trade in dairy produce and margarine. In 1899 was also 
passed the act establishing the Department of Agriculture and 
Technical Instruction in Ireland. 

The year 1900 saw the passing of a Workmen's Compensation 
Act, which extended the benefits of the act of 1897 to agricultural 
labourers. 

Acreage and Yields of British Crops. 

The most notable feature in connexion with the cropping of the 
land of the United .Kingdom between 1875 and 1905 was the 
lessened cultivation of the cereal crops associated with an expan- 
sion in the area of grass land. At the beginning of the period the 
aggregate area under wheat, barley and oats was nearly 10J 
million acres; at the close it did not amount to 8 million acres. 
There was thus a withdrawal during the period of over 2 5 million 
acres from cereal cultivation. From Table I., showing the 
acreages at intervals of five years, it will be learnt that the loss 
fell chiefly upon the wheat crop, which at the close of the period 

Table I. — Areas of Cereal Crops in the United Kingdom 
— Acres. 



Year. 


Wheat. 


Barley. 


Oats. 


Total. 


1875 


3.5H.088 


2,751.362 


4.176,177 


10,441,627 


1880 


3.o65.895 


2,695,000 


4,191,716 


9.952,6n 


1885 


2,553.092 


2,447,169 


4,282,594 


9,282,855 


1890 


2,483.595 


2,300,994 


4.137,790 


8,922,379 


1895 


1,456,042 


2.346,367 


4.527,899 


8,330,308 


1900 


1,901,014 


2,172,140 


4.145.633 


8,218,787 


1905 


1.836,598 


1,872,305 


4,i37.4 6 


7,846,309 



occupied barely more than half the area assigned to it at the 
beginning. If the land taken from wheat had been cropped with 
one or both of the other cereals, the aggregate area would have 
remained about the same. This, however, was not the case, for 
a fairly uniform decrease in the barley area was accompanied by 
somewhat irregular fluctuations in the acreage of oats. To the 
decline in prices of home-grown cereals the decrease in area is 
largely attributable. The extent of this decline is seen in Table 
II., wherein are given the annual average prices from 1875 to 
1905, calculated upon returns from the 190 statutory markets of 
England and Wales (Corn Returns Act 1882). These prices are 
per imperial quarter, — that is, 480 lb of wheat, 400 ft> of barley 
and 312 lb of oats, representing 60 lb, soft and 39 ft) per bushel 
respectively. After 1883 the annual average price of English 
wheat was never so high as 40s. per quarter, and only twice after 



BRITISH] 



AGRICULTURE 



399 



1892 did it exceed 30s. In one of these exceptional years, 1898, 
the average rose to 34s., but this was due entirely to a couple of 
months of inflated prices in the early half of the year, when the 
outbreak of war between Spain and the United States of America 
coincided with a huge speculative deal in the latter country. The 

Table II. — Gazette Annual Average Prices per Imperial Quarter 
of British Cereals in England and Wales, 1875-1905. 



Year. 


Wheat. 


Barley. 


Oats. 




s. 


d. 


s. 


d. 


s. d. 


1875 


45 


2 


38 


5 


28 8 


1876 


46 


2 


35 


2 


26 3 


1877 


56 


9 


39 


8 


25 11 


1878 


46 


5 


40 


2 


24 4 


1879 


43 


10 


34 





21 9 


1880 


44 


4 


33 


1 


23 1 


1881 


45 


4 


3i 


11 


21 9 


1882 


45 


1 


31 


2 


21 10 


1883 


41 


7 


31 


10 


21 5 


1884 


35 


8 


30 


8 


20 3 


1885 


32 


10 


30 


1 


20 7 


1886 


31 





26 


7 


19 


1887 


32 


6 


25 


4 


16 3 


1888 


31 


IO 


27 


10 


16 9 


1889 


29 


9 


25 


10 


17 9 


1890 


3i 


11 


28 


8 


18 7. 


1891 


37 





28 


2 


26 


1892 


30 


3 


26 


2 


•19 10 


1893 


26 


4 


25 


7 


18 9 


1894 


22 


10 


24 


6 


17 1 


1895 


23 


1 


21 


II 


14 6 


1896 


26 


2 


22 


II 


14 9 


1897 


30 


2 


23 


6 


16 11 


1898 


34 





27 


2 


18 5 


1899 


25 


8 


25 


7 


17 


1900 


26 


II 


24 


11 


17 7 


1901 


26 


9 


25 


2 


18 5 


1902 


28 


1 


25 


8 


20 2 


1903 


26 


9 


22 


8 


17 2 


1904 


28 


4 


22 


4 


16 4 


1905 


29 


8 


24 


4 


17 4 



weekly avetage prices of English wheat in 1898 fluctuated between 
48s. id. and 25s. sd. per quarter, the former being the highest 
weekly average since 1882. The minimum annual average was 
22s. iod. in 1894, in the autumn of which year the weekly average 
sank to 17s. 6d. per quarter, the lowest on record. Wheat was 
so great a glut in the market that various methods were devised 
for feeding it to stock, a purpose for which it is not specially 
suited; in thus utilizing the grain, however, a smaller loss was 
often incurred than in sending it to market. In 1894 the monthly 
average price for October, the chief month for wheat-sowing in 
England, was only 17s. 8d. per quarter, and farmers naturally 
shrank from seeding the land freely with a crop which could not 
be grown except at a heavy loss. The result was that in the 
following year the wheat crop of the United Kingdom was 
harvested upon the smallest area on record — less than 15 million 
acres. In only one year, 1878, did the annual average price of 
English barley touch 40s. per quarter; it never reached 30s. 
after 1885, whilst in 1895 it fell to so low a level as 21s. nd. The 
same story of declining prices applies to oats. An average of 20s. 
per quarter was touched in 189 1 and 1902, but with those excep- 
tions this useful feeding grain did not reach that figure after 1885. 
In 1895 the average price of 480 lb of wheat, at 23s. id., was 
identical with that of 312 lb of oats in 1880, and it was less in the 
preceding year. The declining prices that have operated against 
the growers of wheat should be studied in conjunction with 
Table III., which shows, at intervals of five years, the imports of 
Table III. — Imports into the United Kingdom of Wheat Grain, 
and of Wheat Meal and Flour — Cwt. 



Year. 


Wheat Grain. 


Meal and Flour. 


Total. 


1875 


51.876,517 


6,136,083 


58,012,600 


1880 


55,261,924 


10,558,312 


65,820,236 


1885 


61 ,498,864 


15.832,843 


77.33i.707 


1890 


60,474,180 


15.773.336 


76,247,516 


1895 


81,749,955 


18,368,410 


100,118,365 


1900 


68,669,490 


2i,548;i3i 


90,217,621 


1905 


97,622,752 


n.954.763 


I09.577.5i5 



wheat grain and of wheat meal and flour into the United King- 
dom. The import of the manufactured product from 1875 to 1900 
increased -at a much greater ratio than that of the raw grain, for 
whilst in 1875 the former represented less than one-ninth of the 
total, by 1900 the proportion had risen to nearly one-fourth. 
The offal, which is quite as valuable as the flour itself, was thus 
retained abroad instead of being utilized for stock-feeding 
purposes in the United Kingdom. In the five subsequent years 
the proportion was fundamentally altered, so that with a greatly 
increased importation of grain, that of meal and flour was in the 
proportion of about one-ninth. The highest and lowest areas of 
wheat, barley and oats in the United Kingdom during the period 
1875-1905 were the following:— 

Wheat . 3,514,088 acres in 1875; 1,407,618 acres in 1904. 
Barley . 2,931,809 „ ,,1879:1,872,305 „ ,,1905. 
Oats . 4,527,899 „ „ 189513,998,200 „ ,,1879. 

These show differences amounting to 2,106,470 acres for 
wheat, 1,659,504 acres for barley, and 529,699 acres for Oats. 
The acreage of wheat, therefore, fluctuated the most, and that 
of oats the least. Going back to 1869, it is found that the extent 
of wheat in that year was 3,981,989 acres or very little short of 
four million acres. 

The acreage of rye grown in the United Kingdom as a grain 
crop is small, the respective maximum and minimum areas during 
the period 1875-1905 having been 102,676 acres in 1894 and 
47,937 acres in 1880. Rye is perhaps more largely grown as a 
green crop to be fed off by sheep, or cut green for soiling, in the 
spring months. 

Of corn crops other than cereals, beans and peas are both 
less cultivated than formerly. In the period 1875-1905 the area 
of beans in the United Kingdom fluctuated between 574,414 
acres in 1875 and 230,429 acres in 1897, and that of peas between 
318,410 acres in 1875 and 155,668 acres in 1901. The area of 
peas (175,624 acres in 1905) shrank by nearly one-half, and that 
of beans (256,383 acres in 1905) by more than one-half. Taking 
cereals and pulse corn together, the aggregate areas of wheat, 
barley, oats, rye, beans and peas in the United Kingdom varied 
as follows over the six quinquennial intervals embraced in the 
period 1875-1905: — ■ 



Year. 


Acres. 


Year. 


Acres. 


1875 • 
1880 
1885 . 


• n,399,030 
10,672,086 
10,014,625 


1890 

1895 • 
1900 
1905 . 


• 9,574.249 
. 8,865,338 

8,707,602 

• 8,333,770 



Disregarding minor fluctuations, there was thus a loss of corn 
land over the 30 years of 3,065,260 acres, or 27%. 

The area, withdrawn from corn-growing is not to be found 
under the head of what are termed " green crops." In 1905 the 
total area of these crops in the United Kingdom was 4,144,374 
acres, made up thus: — 

Crop. Acres. 

Potatoes 1,236,768 

Turnips and swedes 1,879,384 

Mangel 477,54° 

Cabbage, kohl-rabi and rape .... 225,315 

Vetches or tares . . . . . . . 139,285 

Other green crops . . . . - . . . 186,082 

The extreme aggregate areas of these crops during the thirty 
years were 5,057,029 acres in 1875 and 4,109,394 acres in 1904. 
At five-year intervals the areas were: — 



Year. 


Acres. 


Year. 


Acres. 


1875 
1880 
1885 


• 5,057,029 

• 4.746,293 

• 4.765,195 


1890 

1895 
1900 

I9°5 


• 4.534.145 

• 4.399.949 

• 4.301.774 

• 4.144.374 



These crops, therefore, which, except potatoes, are used mainly 
for stock-feeding, have like the corn crops been grown on 
gradually diminishing areas. 

The land that has been lost to the plough is found to be still 
further augmented when an inquiry is instituted into the area 
devoted to clover, sainfoin and grasses under rotation. The 
areas of five-year intervals are given in Table IV. Under the 
old Norfolk or four-course rotation (roots, barley, clover, wheat) 
land thus seeded with clover or grass seeds was intended to be 



4-oo 



AGRICULTURE 



[BRITISH 



ploughed up at the end of a year. Labour difficulties, low 
prices of produce, bad seasons and similar causes provided in- 
ducements for leaving the land in grass for two years, or over 
three years or more, before breaking it up for wheat. In many 
cases it would be decided to let such land remain under grass 
indefinitely, and thus it would no longer be enumerated in the 
Agricultural Returns as temporary grass land, but would pass 
into the category of permanent grass land, or what is often 
spoken of as " permanent pasture." Whilst much grass land has 
been laid down with the intention from the outset that it should 
be permanent, at the same time some considerable areas have 
through stress of circumstances been allowed to drift from the 
temporary or rotation grass area to the permanent list, and have 
thus still further diminished the area formerly under the dominion 
of the plough. The column relating to permanent grass in 
Table IV. shows clearly enough how the British Isles became 

Table IV. — Areas of Grass Land (excluding Heath and Mountain 
Land) in the United Kingdom — Acres. 







Permanent 




Year. 


Temporary (i.e. 


(i.e. not broken up 


Total. 




under rotation) . 


in rotation). 




1875 


6,337.953 


23,772,602 


. 30.no,555 


1880 


6,389,232 


24,717,092 


31,106,324 


1885 


6,738,206 


25,616,071 


32,354.277 


1890 


6,097,210 


27,115,425 


33,212,635 


1895 


6 J ,o6i,i39 


27,831,117 


33,892,256 


1900 


6,025,025 


28,266,712 


34,291,737 


1905 


5.779.323 


28,865,373 


34,644,696 



more pastoral, while the figures already given demonstrate the 
extent to which they became less arable. In the period 1875- 
1905 the extreme areas returned as " permanent pasture " — a 
term which, it should be clearly understood, does not include 
heath or mountain land, of which there are in Great Britain 
alone about 13 million acres used for grazing — were 23,772,602 
acres in 1875, and 28,865,373 acres in 1905. Comparing 1905 
with 1875 the increase in permanent grass land amounted to 
over five million acres, or about 21 %. 

On account of the greater humidity and mildness of its climate, 
Ireland is more essentially a pastoral country than^Sreat Britain. 
The distribution between the two islands of such important crops 
of arable land as cereals and potatoes is indicated in Table V. 
The figures are those for 1905, but, though the absolute acreages 

Table V.— Areas of Cereal and Potato Crops in Great Britain 
and Ireland in 1905. 



Great Britain 
Ireland 

Total . 


Wheat. 


Barley. 


Acres. 

1.796,993 
37.860 


Acres. 
1,713,664 
154,645 


1,834,853 


1,868,309 


Great Britain 
Ireland 

Total 


Oats. 


Potatoes. 


3.051,376 
1,066,806 


608,473 
6i6,755 


4,118,182 


1,225,228 



vary somewhat from year to year, there is not much variation 
in the proportions. The comparative insignificance of Ireland 
in the case of the wheat and barley crops, represented by 2 and 
8% respectively, receives some compensation when oats and 
potatoes are considered, about one-fourth of the area of the 
former and more than half that of the latter being claimed by 
Ireland. It is noteworthy, however, that Ireland year by year 
places less reliance upon the potato crop. In 1888 the area of 
potatoes in Ireland was 804,566 acres, but it continuously con- 
tracted each year, until in 1905 it was only 616,755 acres, or 
187,811 acres less than 17 years previously. 

A similar comparison for the several sections of Great Britain, 
as set forth in Table VI., shows that to England belong about 
95 % of the wheat area, over 80 % of the barley area, over 60 % 
of the oats area, and over 70 % of the potato area, and these 



proportions do not vary much from year to year. The figures 
for cereals are important, as they indicate that it is the farmers 
of England who are the chief sufferers through the diminishing 
prices of corn; and particularly is this true of East Anglia, where 
corn-growing is more largely pursued than in any other part of the 

Table VI.— Areas of Cereal and Potato Crops in England, Wales 
and Scotland, and in Great Britain, in 1905. 



England 

Wales 

Scotland 


Wheat. 


Barley. 


Acres. 
1,704,281 

44,073 
48,641 


Acres. 
1,410,287 

91.243 
212,134 


Great Britain 


1.796,995 


1,713,664 


England 

Wales 

Scotland 


Oats. 


Potatoes. 


1,880,475 
207,929 
962,972 


434.773 
29,435 

144.265 


Great Britain 


3.051,376 


608,473 



country. Scotland possesses nearly one-third of the area of oats 
and nearly one-fourth of that of potatoes. Beans are almost 
entirely confined to England, and this is even more the case with 
peas. The mangel crop also is mainly English, the summer in 
most parts of Scotland being neither long enough nor warm 
enough to bring it to maturity. 

The Produce of British Crops. 
Whilst the returns relating to the acreage of crops and the 
number of live stock in Great Britain have been officially collected 
in each year since 1866, the annual official estimates of the 
produce of the crops in the several sections 1 of the kingdom do 
not extend back beyond 1885. The practice is for the Board of 
Agriculture to appoint local estimators, who report in the autumn 
as to the total production of the crops in the localities respectively 
assigned to them. By dividing the total production, say of wheat, 
in each county by the number of acres of wheat as returned by 
the occupiers on June 4, the estimated average yield per acre is 
obtained. It is important to notice that the figures relating to 
total production and yield per acre are only estimates, and it is 
not claimed for them that they are anything more. The fact 
that much of the wheat to which the figures apply is still in the 
stack after the publication of the figures shows that the latter 
are essentially estimates. The total produce of any crop in a 
given year must depend mainly upon the acreage grown, whilst 
the average yield per acre will be determined chiefly by the 
character of the season. In Table VII. are shown, in thousands 

Table VII.' — Estimated Annual Total Produce of Corn Crops in 
the United Kingdom, 1890-1905 — Thousands of Bushels. 



Year. 


Wheat. 


Barley. 


Oats. 


Beans. 


Peas. 


1890 


75.994 


80,794 


171.295 


11,860 


6313 


1891 


74.743 


79,555 


166,472 


10,694 


5777 


1892 


60,775 


76,939 


168,181 


7,054 


5028 


1893 


50,913 


65,746 


168,588 


4,863 


4756: 


1894 


60,704 


78,601 


190,863 


7,198 


6229 


1895 


38,285 


75,028 


174476 


5,626 


4732 


1896 


58,247 


77,825 


162,860 


6,491 


4979 


1897 


56,296 


72,613 


163,556 


6,650 


5250 


1898 


74.885 


74,731 


172,578 


7,267 


4858 


1899 


67,261 


74,532 


166,140 


7,566 


4431 


1906 


54.322 


68,546 


165,137 


7,469 


4072 


1901 


53.928 


67.643 


161,175 


6,154 


4017 


1902 


58,278 


74,439 


184,184 


7,704 


5106 


1903 


48,819 


65,310 


172,941 


7.535 


4812 


1904 


37.920 


62,453 


176,755 


5.901 


4446 


1905 


60,333 


65,004 


166.286 


8,262 


4446 



of bushels, the estimated produce of the corn crops of the United 
Kingdom in the years 1890-1905. The largest area of whe&t 
in the period was that of 1890, and the smallest was that bf 
1904; the same two years are seen to have been respectively 
those of highest and lowest total produce. It is noteworthy 
that in 1895 the country produced about half as much wheat 



BRITISH] 



AGRICULTURE 



401 



as in any one of the years 1800, 1801 and 1898. The produce 
of barley, like that of oats, is less irregular than that of wheat, the 
extremes for barley being 80,794,000 bushels (1890) and 62,453,000 
bushels (1904), and those for oats 190,863,000 bushels (1894) 
and 161,175,000 bushels (1001). Similar details for potatoes, 
roots and hay, brought together in Table VIII., show that the 

Table VIII. — Estimated Annual Total Produce of Potatoes, Roots 
and Hay in the United Kingdom, 1890-71905 — Thousands of 
Tons. 



Year. 


Potatoes. 


Turnips. 


Mangels. 


Hay. 


1890 


4622 


32,002 


6709 


14,466 


1891 


6090 


29,742 


7558 


12,671 


1892 


5634 


3L4I9 


7428 


n,567 


1893 


6541 


31,110 


5225 


9,082 


1894 


4662 


30,678 


73io 


15,699 


1895 


7065 


29,221 


6376 


12,238 


1896 


6263 


28,037 


5875 


11,416 


1897 


4107 


29,785 


7379 


14,043 


1898 


6225 


26,499 


7228 


15,916 


1899 


5837 


20,370 


7604 


12,898 


1900 


4577 


28,387 


9650 


13.742 


1901 


7043 


25,298 


9224 


11,358 


1902 


5920 


29,116 


10,809 


15,246 


1903 


5277 


23,523 


8212 


H,955 


1904 


6230 


28,033 


8813 


• 14,860 


1905 


7186 


26,563 


9493 


13,554 



production of potatoes varies much from year to year. The 
imports of potatoes into the United Kingdom vary, to some 
extent inversely; thus, the low production in 1897 was accom- 
panied by an increase of imports from 3,921,205 cwt. in 1897 to 
6,751,728 cwt. in 1898. No very/great reliance can be placed 
upon the figures relating to turnips (which include swedes), as 
these are mostly fed to sheep on the ground, so that the estimates 
as to yield are necessarily vague. Mangels are probably more 
closely estimated, as these valuable roots are carted and stored 
for subsequent use for feeding stock. Under hay are included 
the produce of clover, sainfoin and rotation grasses, and also 
that of permanent meadow. The extent to which the annual 
production of the leading fodder crop may vary is shown in the 
table by the two consecutive years 1893 and 1894; from only 
nine million tons in the former year the production rose to up- 
wards of fifteen million tons in the latter, an increase of over 
70%. 

Turning to the average yialds per acre, as ascertained by 
dividing the number of acres into the total produce, the results 
of a decade are collected in Table IX. The effects of a prolonged 

Table IX.* — Estimated Annual Average Yield per Acre of Crops in 



drought, as distinguished from spring and summer drought, are 
shown in the very low yield of turnips in 1899. Mangels are 
sown earlier and have a longer period of growth than turnips; if 
they become well established in the summer they are less sus- 
ceptible to autumn drought. The hay made from clover, sain- 
foin and grasses under rotation generally gives a bigger average 
yield than that from permanent grass land. The mean values at 
the foot of the table — they are not, strictly speaking, exact 
averages — indicate the average yields per acre in the United 
Kingdom to be about 31 bushels of wheat, 33 bushels of barley, 
40 bushels of oats, 28 bushels of beans, 26 bushels of peas, 4! tons 
of potatoes, 131 tons of turnips and swedes, 185 tons of mangels, 
32 cwt. of hay from temporary grass, and 29 cwt. of hay from 
permanent grass. Although enormous single crops of mangels 

Table X. — Decennial Average Yields in Great Britain of Wheat, 
Barley and Oats — Bushels per acre. 



10- Year 
Periods. 


Wheat. 


Barley. 

» 


Oats. 


1885-1894 


29-32 


33-02 


38-21 


1 886-1895 


28-81 


32-68 


38-23 


1887-1896 


29-49 


32-82 


38-13 


1 888-1 897 


29-19 


32-97 


38-51 


1889-1898 


29-86 


33-26 


38-86 


1890T1899 


30-15 


33-50 


38-81 


1891-1900 


29-92 


33-13 


38-46 


1 892- 1 90 1 


29-88 


32-80 


38-26 


1893-1902 


30-53 


32-83 


38-64 


1894-1903 


3o-95 


33-i6 


39-05 


1895-1904 


30-56 


32-82 


38-81 


1 896- 1 905 


31-21 


33-04 


38-92 



are spmetimes grown, amounting occasionally to 100 tons per 
acre, the general average yield of i8j tons is about 5 tons more 
than that of turnips and swedes. Again, although from the 
richest old permanent meadow-lands very heavy crops of 
hay are taken season after season, the general average yield of 
permanent grass is about 3 cwt. of hay per acre less than that 
from clover, sainfoin and grasses under rotation. The general 
average yields of the corn crops are not fairly comparable one 
with the other, because they are given by measure and not by 
weight, whereas the weight per bushel varies considerably. For 
purposes of comparison it would be much better if the yields of 
corn crops were estimated in cwt. per acre. This, indeed, is the 
practice in Ireland, and in order to incorporate the Irish figures 
with those for Great Britain so as to obtain average values for the 
United Kingdom, the Irish yields are calculated into bushels at 



United Kingdom, 1 895-1904. 



Year. 


Wheat. 


Barley. 


Oats. 


Beans. 


Peas. 


Pota- 
toes. 


Turnips 

and 
Swedes. 


Mangels. 


Hay. 


Rota- 
tion. 


Perman- 
ent. 




Bush. 


Bush. 


Bush. 


Bush. 


Bush. 


Tons. 


Tons. 


Tons. 


Cwt. 


Cwt. 


1895 


26-33 


32-09 


38-67 


22:98 


22-62 


5-64 


I3-" 


16-44 


29-08 


25-21 


1896 


33-63 


34-16 


37-97 


25-69 


25-34 


4-93 , 


12-79 


14-99 


27-95 


24-14 


1897 


29-07 


32-91 


38-84 


28-91 


27-55 


3-47 


13-90 


18-03 


32-53 


30-71 


1898 


34-75 


36-24 


42-27 


3I-I3 


27-60 


5-23 


12-74 


17-71 


36-49 


34-27 


1899 


32-76 


34-64 


40-57 


30-19 


27-22 


4-82 


9-97 


17-41 


31-04 


29-11 


1900 


28-61 


3I-67 


39-97 


28-18 


25-89 


3-77 


14-29 


19-97 


32-42 


30-9.8 


1901 


30-93 


31-70 


39-35 


24-29 


25-97 


5-81 


12-95 


19-37 


28-98 


23-85 


1902 


3291 


35-83 


44-5o 


31-49 


28-51. 


4-92 


15-35 


20-85 


35-29 


32-57 


1903 


30-15 


32-38 


40-81 


31-27 


26-56 


4-45 


12-44 


17-19 


33-07 


31-27 


1904 


26-97 


31-25 


40-80 


23-23 


25-75 


5-24 


14-83 


18-57 


33-43 


31-04 


Mean, 
10 






















years 


30-85 


33-28 


40-35 


27-68 


26-24 


4-84 


13-21 


18-18 


32-06 


29-32 


1905 


32-88 


34-79 


40-38 


32-33 


25-71 


5-86 


14-19 


19-91 


32-24 


28-37 



spring and summer drought, like that of 1893, are exemplified in 
the circumstance that four corn crops and the two hay crops all 
registered very low average yields that year, viz. wheat 26-08 
bushels, barley 29-30 bushels, oats 38-14 bushels, beans 19-61 
bushels, rotation hay 23-55 cwt., permanent hay 20-41 cwt. 
On the other hand, the season of 1898 was exceptionally favour- 
able to cereals and to hay. The effects of a prolonged autumn 



the rate of 60 lb to the bushel 
of wheat, of beans and of peas, 
50 lb to the bushel of barley 
and 39 lb to the bushel of oats. 
The figure denoting the 
general average yield per acre 
of any class of crop needs re- 
adjustment after every succes- 
sive harvest. If a decennial 
period be taken, then — for the 
purpose of the new calculation 
— the earliest year is omitted 
and the latest year added, the 
number of years continuing at 
ten. Adopting this course in 
the case of the cereal crops of 
Great Britain the decennial 
averages recorded in Table X. 
are obtained, the period 1885- 
1894 being the earliest decade 
for which the official figures are available. It thus appears 
that the average yield of wheat in Great Britain, as calcu- 
lated upon the crops harvested during the ten years (1896- 
1905), exceeded 31 bushels to the acre, whereas, for the ten 
years ended 1895, it fell below 29 bushels. A large expansion 
in the acreage of the wheat crop would probably be at- 
tended by a decline in the average yield per acre, for when a 



4-02 



AGRICULTURE 



[BRITISH 



crop is shrinking in area the tendency is to withdraw from it first 
the land least suited to its growth. The general average for the 
United Kingdom might then recede to rather less than 28 bushels 
of 60 lb per bushel, which was for a long time the accepted 
average — unless, of course, improved methods of cultivating and 
manuring the soil were to increase its general wheat-yielding 
capacity. 1 

Crops and Cropping. 

The greater freedom of cropping and the less close adherence to 
the formal system of rotation of crops, which characterize the 
early years of the 20th century, rest upon a scientific basis. 
Experimental inquiry has done much to enlighten the farmer as 
to the requirements of plant-life, and to enable him to see how 
best to meet these requirements in the case of field crops. He 
cannot afford to ignore the results that have been gradually 
accumulated — the truths that have been slowly established — at 
the agricultural experiment stations in various parts of the 
world. Of these stations^the greatest, and the oldest now existing, 
is that at Rothamsted, Harpenden, Herts, England, which was 
founded in 1843 by Sir John Bennet Lawes (q.v.). The results of 
more than half a century of sustained experimental inquiry were 
communicated to the world by Lawes and his collaborator, Sir 
J. H. Gilbert, in about 130 separate papers or'reports, many of 
which were published, from 1847 onwards, in the Journal of the 
Royal Agricultpral Society of England? 

In the case of plants the method of procedure was to grow some 
of the most important crops of rotation, each separately year 
after year, for many years in succession on the same land, (a) 
without manure, (6) with farmyard manure and (c) with a great 
variety of chemical manures; the same description of manure 
being, as a rule, applied year after year on the same plot. Experi- 
ments on an actual course of rotation, without manure, and with 
different manures, have also been made. Wheat, barley, oats, 
beans, clover and other leguminous plants, turnips, sugar beet, 
mangels, potatoes and grass crops have thus been experimented 
upon. Incidentally there have been extensive sampling and 
analysing of soils, investigations into rainfall and the composition 
of drainage waters, inquiries into the amount of water transpired 
by plants^and experiments on the assimilation of free nitrogen. 

Cereals. — Amongst the field experiments there is, perhaps, not 
one of more universal interest than that in which wheat was 
grown for fifty-seven years in succession, (a) without manure, 
(6) with farmyard manure and (c) with various artificial manures. 
The results show that, unlike leguminous crops such as beans or 
clover, wheat may be successfully grown for many years in suc- 
cession on ordinary arable land, provided suitable manures be 
applied and the land be kept clean. Even without manure the 
average produce over forty-six years, 1852-1897, was nearly 
thirteen bushels per acre, or about the average yield per acre of 

1 The higher yield of wheat in the later years of the 19th century 
appears to be largely attributable to better grain-growing seasons. 
The yields in the experimental wheat-field at Rothamsted — where 
there is no change either of land or of treatment — indicate this. 
The following figures show the average yields per acre of theselected 
plots at Rothamsted over six 8-yearly periods from 1852 to 1899, 
and afford evidence that the higher yield of later years is due to the 
seasons : — 

Bushels (of 60 lb) 
Average of — per acre. 

8 years 1 852-1 859 28f 

8 „ 1860-1867 28I 

8 „ 1868-1875 27$ 

8 „ 1876-1883 25i 

8 „ 1884-1891 29I 

8 „ 1892-1899 30 

32 „ 1852-1883 27I 

16 „ 1884-1899 . . . . . .30 



48 „ 1852-1899 28^ 

The average of the first thirty-two years was thus 27I bushels per 
acre, of the last sixteen years 30 bushels, and of the whole forty-eight 
years 28} bushels. 

1 See J. B. Lawes and J. H. Gilbert, Rothamsted Memoirs on 
Agricultural Chemistry and Physiology, 7 vols. (1893-1899); A. D. 
Hall, Book of the Rothamsted Experiments (1905). 



the wheat lands of the whole world. Mineral manures alone give 
very little increase, nitrogenous manures alone considerably more 
than mineral manures alone, but the mixture of the two con- 
siderably more than either separately. In one case, indeed, the 
average produce by mixed minerals and nitrogenous manure was 
more than that by the annual application of farmyard manure; 
and in seven out of the ten cases in which such mixtures were 
used the average yield per acre was from over two to over eight 
bushels more than the average yield of the United Kingdom 
(assuming this to be about twenty-eight bushels of 60 lb per 
bushel) under ordinary rotation. It is estimated that the 
reduction in yield of the unmanured plot over the forty years, 
1852-1891, after the growth of the crops without manure during 
the eight preceding years, was, provided it had been uniform 
throughout, equivalent to a decline of one-sixth of a bushel from 
year to year due to exhaustion — that is, irrespectively of fluctua- 
tions due to season. It is related that a visitor from the United 
States, talking to Sir John Lawes, said, " Americans have learnt 
more from this field than from any other agricultural experiment 
in the world." 

Experiments upon the growth of barley for fifty years in 
succession on rather heavy ordinary arable soil resulted in show- 
ing that the produce by mineral manures alone is larger than that 
without manure; that nitrogenous manures alone give more 
produce than mineral manures alone; and that mixtures of 
mineral and nitrogenous manure give much more than, either 
used alone — generally twice, or more than twice, as much as 
mineral manures alone. Of mineral constituents, whether used 
alone or in mixture with nitrogenous manures, phosphates are 
much more effective than mixtures of salts of potash, soda and 
magnesia. The average results show that, under all conditions 
of manuring — excepting with farmyard manure— the produce 
was less over the later than over the earlier periods of the experi- 
ments, an effect partly due to the seasons. But the average 
produce over forty years of continuous growth of barley was, in 
all cases where nitrogenous and mineral manures (containing 
phosphates) were used together, much higher than the average 
produce of the crop grown in ordinary rotation in the United 
Kingdom, and very much higher than the average in most other 
countries when so grown. The requirements of barley within the 
soil, and its susceptibility to the external influences of season,, are 
very similar to those of its near ally, wheat. Nevertheless there 
are distinctions of result dependent on differences in the habits of 
the two plants, and in the conditions of their cultivation accord- 
ingly. In the British Isles wheat is, as a rule, sown in the autumn 
on a heavier soil, and has four or five months in which to- dis- 
tribute its roots, and so it gets possession of a wide range of soil 
and subsoil before barley is sown in the spring. Barley, on the 
other hand, is sown in a lighter surface soil, and, with its short 
period for root-development, relies in a much greater degree on 
the stores of plant-food within the surface soil. Accordingly it 
is more susceptible to exhaustion of surface soil as to its nitro- 
genous, and especially as to its mineral supplies; and in the 
common practice of agriculture it is found to be more benefited 
by direct mineral manures, especially phosphatic manures, than 
is wheat when sown under equal soil conditions. The exhaustion 
of the soil induced by both barley and wheat is, however, char- 
acteristically that of available nitrogen; and when, under the 
ordinary conditions of manuring and cropping, artificial manure 
is still required, nitrogenous manures are, as a rule, necessary for 
both crops, and, for the spring-sown barley, superphosphate also. 
Although barley is appropriately grown on lighter soils than 
wheat, good crops, of fair quality, may be grown on the heavier 
soils after another grain crop by the aid of artificial manures, 
provided that the land is sufficiently clean. Experiments similar 
to the foregoing were carried on for many years in succession at 
Rothamsted upon oats, and gave results which were in general 
accordance with those on the other cereal crops. 

Additional significance to the value of the above experiments 
on wheat and barley is afforded by the fact that the same series, 
with but slight modifications, has also been carried out since 
1876 at the Woburn (Bedfordshire) experimental farm of the 



BRITISH) 



AGRICULTURE 



403 



Royal Agricultural Society of England, the soil here being of 
light sandy character, and thus very different from the heavy 
soil of Rothamsted. The results for the thirty years, 1877-1906, 
are in their general features entirely confirmatory of those 
obtained at Rothamsted. 

Root-Crops. — Experiments upon root-crops — chiefly white 
turnips, Swedish turnips (swedes) and mangels— have resulted 
in the establishment of the following conclusions. Both the 
quantity and the quality of the produce, and consequently its 
feeding value, must depend greatly upon the selection of the 
best description of roots to be grown, and on the character and 
the amount of the manures, and especially on the amount of 
nitrogenous manure employed. At the same time, no hard- 
and-fast rules can be laid down concerning these points. Inde- 
pendently of the necessary consideration of the general economy 
of the farm, the choice must be influenced partly by the character 
of the soil, but very much more by that of the climate. Judgment 
founded on knowledge and aided by careful observation; both 
in the field and in the feeding-shed, must be relied upon as the 
guide of the practical farmer. Over and above the great advan^ 
tage arising from the opportunity which the growth of root-crops 
affords for the cleaning of the land, the benefits of growing the 
root-crop in rotation are due (1) to the large amount of manure 
applied for its growth, (2) to the large residue of the manure left 
in the soil for future crops, (3) to the large amount of matter 
at once returned as manure again in the leaves, (4) to the large 
amount of food produced, and (5) to the small proportion of the 
most important manurial constituents of the roots which is 
retained by store or fattening animals consuming them, the rest 
returning as manure again; though, when the roots are consumed 
for the production of milk, a much larger proportion of the con- 
stituents is lost to the manure. 

Leguminous Crops and the Acquisition of Nitrogen. — The fact 
that the growth of a leguminous crop, such as red clover, leaves 
the soil in a higher condition for the subsequent growth of a grain 
crop — that, indeed, the growth of such a leguminous crop is to 
a great extent equivalent to • the application of a nitrogenous 
manure for the cereal crop — was in effect known ages ago. 
Nevertheless it was not till near the approach of the closing 
decade of the 19th century that the explanation of this long- 
established point of agricultural practice was forthcoming. It 
was in the year 1886 that Hellriegel and Wilfarth first published 
in Germany the results of investigations in which they demon- 
strated that, through the agency of micro-organisms dwelling 
in nodular outgrowths on the roots of ordinary leguminous 
plants, the latter are enabled to assimilate the free nitrogen of 
the air. The existence of the root nodules had long been recog- 
nized, but hitherto no adequate explanation had been afforded 
as to their function. 

Since Hellriegel's striking discovery farm crops have been 
conveniently classified as nitrogen-accumulating and nitrogen- 
consuming. To the former belong the ordinary leguminous 
crops — the clovers, beans, peas, vetches or tares, sainfoin, 
lucerne, for example — which obtain their nitrogen from the air, 
and are independent of the application of nitrogenous manures, 
whilst in their roots they accumulate a store of nitrogen which 
will ultimately become available for future crops of other 
kinds. It is, in fact, fully established that these leguminous 
crops acquire a considerable amount of nitrogen by the fixation 
of the free nitrogen of the atmosphere under the influence of 
the symbiotic growth of their root-nodule-microbes and the 
higher plant. The cereal crops (wheat, barley, oats, rye, maize) ; 
the cruciferous crops (turnips, cabbage, kale, rape, mustard); 
the solanaceous crops (potatoes); the chenopodiaceous crops 
(mangels, sugar-beets), and other non-leguminous crops have, 
so far as is known, no such power, and are therefore more or 
less benefited by the direct application of nitrogenous manures. 
The field experiments on leguminous plants at Rothamsted have 
shown that land which is, so to speak, exhausted so far as the 
growth of one leguminous crop is concerned, may still grow very 
luxuriant crops of another plant of the same natural order, 
but of different habits of growth, and especially of different 



character and range of roots. This result is doubtless largely 
dependent on the existence, the distribution and the condition 
of the appropriate microbes for the due infection of the different 
descriptions of plant, for the micro-organism that dwells sym- 
bio tically with one species is not identical with that whicb 
similarly dwells with another. It seems certain that success h? 
any system involving a more extended growth of leguminous 
crops in rotations must be dependent on a considerable variation 
in the description grown. Other essential conditions of success 
will commonly include the liberal application of potash and 
phosphatic manures, and sometimes chalking or liming for the 
leguminous crop. As to how long the^ leguminous crop should 
occupy the land, the extent to which it should be consumed 
on the land, or the manure from its consumption be returned, 
and under what conditions the whole or part of it should be 
ploughed in — these are points which must be decided as they 
arise in practice. It seems obvious that the lighter and poorer 
soils would benefit more than the heavier or richer soils by the 
extended growth of leguminous crops. 

Remarkable as Hellriegel's discovery was, it merely furnished 
the explanation of a fact which had been empirically established 
by the husbandman long before, and had received most intelligent 
application when the old four-course (or Norfolk) rotation was 
devised. But it gave some impetus to the practice of green 
manuring with leguminous crops, which are equally capable 
with such a crop as mustard of enriching the soil in humus, 
whilst in addition they bring into the soil from the atmosphere 
a quantity of nitrogen available for the use of subsequent crops 
of any kind. In Canada and the United States this rational 
employment of a leguminous crop for ploughing in green is 
largely resorted to for the amelioration of worn-out wheat lands 
and other soils, the condition of which has been lowered to an 
unremunerative level by the repeated growth year after year 
of a cereal crop. The well-known paper of Lawes, Gilbert and 
Pugh (1861), " On the Sources of the Nitrogen of Vegetation^ 
with special reference to the Question whether Plants assimilate 
free or uncombined Nitrogen," answered the question referred 
to in the negative. The attitude taken up later on with regard 
to this problem is set forth in the following words, which are 
quoted from the Memoranda of the Rothamsted Experiments, 
1900 (p. 7):— > 

" Experiments were commenced in 1857, and conducted for several 
years in succession, to determine whether plants assimilate free or 
uncombined nitrogen, and also various collateral points. Plants 
of the : gramineous, the leguminous and of other families were 
operated upon. The late Dr Pugh took a prominent part in this 
inquiry. The conclusion arrivedat wasthatouragriculturalplarits 
do not themselves directly assimilate the free nitrogen of the air by 
their leaves. 

" In recent years, however, the question has assumed quite a new 
aspect. It now is — whether the free nitrogen of the atmosphere is 
brought into combination under the influence of micro-organisms, 
or other low forms, either within the soil or in symbiosis with a 
higher plant, thus serving indirectly as a source of nitrogen to 
plants of a higher order., Considering that the results of Hellriegel 
and Wilfarth on this point were, if confirmed, of great significance 
and importance, it was decided to make experiments at Rothamsted 
on somewhat similar lines. Accordingly, a preliminary series was 
undertaken in 1888; more extended series were conducted in 1889 
and in 1890; and the investigation was continued up to the. com- 
mencement of the year 1895. Further experiments relating to 
certain aspects of the subject were begun in 1898. The results 
have shown that, when a soil growing leguminous plants is infected 
with appropriate organisms, there is a development Of the so-called 
leguminous nodules on the roots of the plants, and, coincidently, 
increased growth and gain of nitrogen." 

The conclusions of Hellriegel and Wilfarth have thus been 
confirmed by the later experiences of : Rothamsted, and since 
that time efforts have been directed energetically to the practical 
application of the discovery. This has taken the form of in- 
oculating the soil with the particular organism required by the 
particular kind of leguminous crop. To this end the endeavour 
has been made to produce preparations which shall contain in 
portable form the organisms required by the several plants, 
and though, as yet, it can hardly be claimed that they have 
been generally successful, the work done justifies hopes 



404 



AGRICULTURE 



(BRITISH 



that the problem will eventually be solved in a practical 
direction. 

Grass. — Another field experiment of singular interest is that 
relating to the mixed herbage of permanent meadow, for which 
seven acres of old grass land were set apart in Rothamsted Park 
in 1856. Of the twenty plots into which this land is divided, 
two were left without manure from the outset, two received 
ordinary farmyard manure for a series of years, whilst the 
remainder each received a different description of artificial or 
chemical manure, the same being, except in special cases, applied 
year after year on the same plot. During the growing season 
the field affords striking evidence of the influence of different 
manurial dressings. So much, indeed, does the character of 
the herbage vary from plot to plot that the effect may fairly 
be described as kaleidoscopic. Repeated analyses have shown 
how greatly both the botanical constitution and the chemical 
composition of the mixed herbage vary according to the descrip- 
tion of manure applied. They have further shown how dominant 
is the influence of season. Such, moreover, is the effect of 
different manures that the gross produce of the mixed herbage 
is totally different on the respective plots according to the 
manure employed, both as to the proportion of the various 
species composing it and as to their condition of development 
and maturity. 

The Rotation of Crops. 

The growth, year after year, on the same soil of one kind of 
plant unfits it for bearing further crops of the kind which has 
exhausted it, and renders themjless vigorous and more liable to 
disease. The farmer therefore arranges his cropping in such a 
way that roots, or leguminous crops, succeed the cereal crops. 

It is not only the conditions of growth, but the uses to which 
the different crops are put, that have to be considered in the case 
of rotation. Thus the cereal crops, when grown in rotation, 
yield more produce for sale in the season of growth than when 
grown continuously. Moreover, the crops alternated with the 
cereals accumulate very much more of mineral constituents 
and of nitrogen in their produce than do the cereals themselves. 
By far the greater proportion of those constituents remains in 
circulation in the manure of the farm, whilst the remainder 
yields highly valuable products for sale in the forms of meat 
and milk. For this reason these crops are known as " restora- 
tive," cereals the produce of which is sold off the farm being 
classed as " exhaustive." With a variety of crops, again, the 
mechanical operations of the farm, involving horse and hand 
labour, are better distributed over the year, and are therefore 
more economically performed. The opportunities which rotation 
cropping affords for the cleaning of the land from weeds is 
another distinct element of advantage. Although many different 
rotations of crops are practised, they may for the most part be 
considered as little more than local adaptations of the system 
of alternating root-crops and leguminous crops with cereal 
crops, as exemplified in the old four-course rotation— roots, 
barley, clover, wheat. 

Under this system the clover is ploughed up in the autumn, 
the nitrogen stored up in its roots being left in the soil for the 
nourishment of the cereal crop. The following summer the 
wheat crop is harvested, and an opportunity is afforded for 
extirpating weeds which in the three previous years have re- 
ceived little check. Or, where the climate is warm and the soil 
light, a " catch-crop," i.e. rye, vetches, winter-oats or some 
other rapidly-growing crop may be sown in autumn and fed off 
or otherwise disposed of prior to the root-sowing. On heavy 
soils, however, the farmer cannot afford to curtail the time 
necessary for thorough cultivation of the land. The cleaning 
process is carried on through the next summer by means of 
successive hoeings of the spring-sown root-crop. As turnips or 
swedes may occupy the ground till after Christmas little time 
is left for the preparation of a seed-bed for barley, but as the 
latter is a shallow-rooted crop only surface-stirring is required. 
Clover is sown at the same time or shortly after the cere^aj a,nd 
thus occupies the land for two years. 



The rotations extending to five, six; seven or more years are, 
in most cases, only adaptations of the principle to variations of 
soil, altitude, aspect, climate, markets and other local conditions. 
They are effected chiefly by some alteration in the description 
of the root-crop, and perhaps by the introduction of the potato 
crop; by growing a different cereal, or it may be more than one 
cereal consecutively; by the growth of some other leguminous 
crop than clover, since " clover-sickness " may result if that 
crop is grown at too short intervals, or the intermixture of grass 
seeds with the clover, and perhaps by the extension by one or 
more years of the period allotted to this member of the rotation. 
Whatever the specific rotation, there may in practice be devia- 
tions from the plan of retaining on the farm the whole of the 
root-crops, the straw of the grain crops and the leguminous 
fodder crops (clover, vetches, sainfoin, &c.) for the production 
of meat or milk, and, coincidently, for that of manure to be 
returned to the land. It is equally true that, when under the 
influence of special local or other demand — proximity to towns, 
easy railway or other communication, for example — the products 
which would otherwise be retained on the farm are exported 
from it, the import of town or other manures is generally an 
essential condition of such practice. This system of free sale, 
indeed, frequently involves full compensation by purchased 
manures of some kind. Such deviations from the practice of 
merely selling grain and meat off the farm have much extended 
in recent years, and will probably continue to do so under the 
altered conditions of British agriculture, determined by very 
large imports of grain, increasing imports of meat and of other 
products of stock-feeding, and very large imports of cattle-food 
and other agricultural produce. More attention is thus being 
devoted to dairy produce, not only on grass farms, but on those 
that are mainly arable. 

The benefits that accrue from the practice of rotation are well 
illustrated in the results obtained from the investigations at 
Rothamsted into the simple four-course system, which may 
fairly be regarded as a self-supporting system. Reference may 
first be made to the important mineral constituents of different 
crops of the four-course rotation. Of phosphoric acid, the cereal 
crops take up as much as, or more than, any other crops of the 
rotation, excepting clover; and the greater portion thus taken 
up is lost to the farm in the saleable product — the grain. The 
remainder, that in the straw, as well as that in the roots and the 
leguminous crops, is supposed to be retained on the farm, except- 
ing the small amount exported in meat and milk. Of potash, 
each of the rotation crops takes up very much more, than of 
phosphoric acid. But much less potash than phosphoric acid 
is exported in the cereal grains, much more being retained in the 
straw, whilst the other products of the rotation— the root and 
leguminous crops — which are also supposed to be retained on 
the farm, contain very much more potash than the cereals, 
and comparatively little of it is exported in meat and milk. Thus 
the whole of the crops of rotation take up very much more of 
potash than of phosphoric acid, whilst probably even less of it is 
ultimately lost to the land. Of lime, very little is taken up by 
the cereal crops, and by the root-crops much less than of potash; 
more by the leguminous than by the other crops, and, by the 
clover especially, sometimes much more than by all the other 
crops of the rotation put together. Very little of the lime of 
the crops, however, goes off in the saleable products of the farm 
in the case of the self-supporting rotation under considera- 
tion. Although, therefore, different, and sometimes very large, 
amounts of these typical mineral constituents are taken up by 
the various crops of rotation, there is no material export of any 
in the saleable products, excepting of phosphoric acid and of potash; 
and, so far at least as phosphoric acid is concerned, experience 
has shown that it may be advantageously supplied in purchased 
manures. 

Of nitrogen, the cereal crops take up and retain much less than 
any of the crops alternated with them, notwithstanding the 
circumstance that the cereals are very characteristically benefited 
by nitrogenous manures. The root-crops, indeed, may contain 
two or more times as much nitrogen as either pf the cereals,, 



BRITISH] 



AGRICULTURE 



405 



and the leguminous crops, especially the clover, much more 
than the root-crops. The greater part of the nitrogen of the 
cereals is, however, sold off the farm; but perhaps not more 
than 10 or 15 % of that of either the root-crop or the clover (or 
other forage leguminous crop) is sold off in animal increase or in 
milk. Most of the nitrogen in the straw of the cereals, and a very- 
large proportion of that of the much more highly nitrogen- 
yielding crops, returns to the land as manure, for the benefit of 
future cereals and other crops. As to the source of the nitrogen 
of the root-crops — the so-called " restorative crops " — these are 
as dependent as any crop that is grown on available nitrogen 
within the soil, which is generally supplied by the direct appli- 



cation of nitrogenous manures, natural or artificial. Under such 
conditions of supply, however, the root-crops, gross feeders as 
they are, and distributing a very large extent of fibrous feeding 
root within the soil, avail themselves of a much larger quantity 
of the nitrogen supplied than the cereal crops would do in 
similar circumstances. This result is partly due to their period 
of accumulation and growth extending even months after the 
period of collection by the ripening cereals has terminated, and 
at the season when nitrification within the soil is most active, 
and the accumulation of nitrates in it is the greatest. When 
a full supply of both mineral constituents and nitrogen is at 
command* these root-crops assimilate a very large amount of 



Table X 


. — The Weight and Average Composition of Ordinary Crops 


, in lb. per Acre 








Crop. 


Weight of Crop. 


Total 
Pure 
Ash. 


Nitro- 
gen. 


Sul- 
phur. 


Potash. 


Soda. 


Lime. 


Mag- 
nesia. 


Phos- 
phoric 
Acid. 


Chlor- 
ine. 


Silica. 


At 
Harvest. 


Dry. 


Wheat, grain, 30 bushels 
,, straw 

Total crop 




1,800 
3,158 


1530 
2653 


30 
142 


34 
16 


2-7 

5-i 


9-3 
19-5 


o-6 

2-0 


1-0 
8-2 


3-6 
3-5 


14-2 
69 


0-1 

2-4 


o-6 
96-3 


4,958 


4! 83 


172 


50 


7-8 


28-8 


2-6 


9-2 


7-1 


2I-I 


2-5 


96-9 ( 


Barley, grain, 40 bushels 
„ straw 

Total crop 




2,080 

2,447 


1747 
2080 


46 
in 


35 


2-9 
3-2 


9-8 
25-9 


I-I 
3-9 


1-2 

8-o 


4-0 
29 


16-0 
4-7 


05 

3-6 


n-8 
56-8 


4,527 


3827 


157 


49 


6-1 


357 


5-° 


9-2 


6-9 


20-7 


4-1 


68-6 


Oats, grain, 45 bushels 
,, straw 

Total crop 




1,890 
3,835 


1625 
2353 


51. 
140 


34 
18 


3-2 
4-8 


9-1 
37-0 


o-8 
4-6 


1-8 
9-8 


3-6 
5-1 


13-0 
6-4 


0-5 
6-1 


19.9 
65-4 


4,725 


3978 


191 


52 


8-0 


46-1 


5-4 


n-6 


8-7 


19-4 


6-6 


85-3 


Maize, grain, 30 bushels 
,, stalks, &c. 

Total crop 




1,680 
2,208 


1500 

1877 


22 
99 


28 
15 


1-8 


6-5 
29-8 


0-2 


o-5 


3-4 


IO-O 

8-0 


0-2 


0-5 


3,888 


3377 


121 


43 




36-3 








i-8-o 


— 




Meadow hay, i| ton . 




3,36o 


2822 


203 


49 


5-7 


50-9 


9-2 


32-1 


14-4 


123 


14-6 


56-9 


Red Clover hay, 2 tons 




4,480 


3763 


258 


98 


9.4 


83-4 


5-i 


90-1 


28-2 


24-9 


9-8 


7-0 


Beans, grain, 30 bushels 
,, straw 

Total crop 




1,920 
2,240 


1613 
1848 


58 
99 


78 
29 


4.4 
4.9 


24-3 
42-8 


o-6 
1-7- 


2-9 
26-3 


4-2 
57 


22-8 

6-3 


i-i 

4-3 


0-4 
6-9 


4,160 


346i 


157 


107 


9-3 


6 7 -I 


2-3 


29-2 


9-9 


29-1 


5-4 


7-3 


Turnips, root, 17 tons 
leaf . 

Total crop 




38,080 
11,424 


3126 
1531 


218 
146 


61 
49 


15-2 

5-7 


108-6 
40-2 


17-0 

7-5 


25-5 
48-5 


5-7 
3-8 


22-4 
10-7 


10-9 

1 1 -2 


2-6 

5-1 


49,504 


4657 


364 


no 


20-9 


148-8 


24-5 


74-0 


9-5 


33-i 


22-1 


7-7 


Swedes, root, 14 tons 
„ leaf 

Total crop 




31,360 
4,704 


3349 
706 


163 

75 


70 
28 


14-6 
3-2 


63-3 
16-4 


22-8 

92 


19-7 

22-7 


6-8 
2-4 


16-9 
4-8 


6-8 
8-3 


3-1 
3-6 


36,064 


4055 


238 


98 


17-8* 


79-7 


32-0 


42-4 


9-2 


21-7 


I5-I 


6-7 


Mangels, root, 22 tons 
leaf . 

Total crop 




49,280 
18,233 


59H 
1654 


426 
254 


98 
51 


4.9 
91 


222-8 

77-9 


69-4 
49-3 


15-9 
27-0 


18-3 
24-2 


36-4 
16-5 


42-5 
40-6 


8-7 
9-2 


67,513 


7568 


680 


149 


14-0 


300-7 


118-7 


42-9 


42-5 


52-9 


8 3 "i 


179 


Potatoes, tubers, 6 tons 




13,440 


336o 


127 


46 


27 


76-5 


3-8 


3-4 


6-3 


21-5 


4.4 


2-6 



*Calculated from a single analysis only. 



carbon from the atmosphere, and produce, besides nitrogenous 
food materials, a very large amount of the carbohydrate sugar, 
as respiratory and fat-forming food for the live stock of the farm. 
The still more highly nitrogenous leguminous crops, although 
not characteristically benefited by nitrogenous manures, never- 
theless contribute much more nitrogen to the total produce of the 
rotation than any of the other crops comprised in it. It is the 
leguminous fodder crops — especially clover, which has a much 
more extended period of growth, and much wider range of 
collection within the soil and subsoil, than any of the other 
crops of the rotation — that yield in their produce the largest 
amount of nitrogen per acre. Much of this is doubtless 
taken up as nitrate, yet the direct application of nitrate of 
soda has comparatively little beneficial influence on their 
growth. The nitric acid is most likely taken up chiefly as 
nitrate of lime, but probably as nitrate of potash also, arid 



it is significant that the high nitrogen-yielding clover takes 
up, or at least retains, very little soda. Table XL, from War- 
ington's Chemistry of the Farm, 19th edition (Vinton and Co.), 
will serve to illustrate the subjects that have been discussed in 
this section. 

For further information on the routine and details of farming, 
reference may be made to the articles under the headings of the 
various crops and implements. 

British Live Stock. 

The numbers of live stock in the United Kingdom are shown 
at five-yearly intervals in Table XII. Under horses are em- 
braced only unbroken horses and horses used solely for agri- 
culture (including mares kept for breeding). The highest and 
lowest annual totals for the United Kingdom in the period 1875- 
1905 were the following* 



4-o6 



AGRICULTURE 



[BRITISH 





Highest. 


Lowest. 


Difference. 


Horses . 
Cattle . . 
Sheep . 
Pigs. . . 


2,116,800 in 1905 
n r 674,oi9 ,, 1905 
33,642,808 ,, 1892 

4,362,040 ,, 1890 


1,819,687 in 1875 

9-73L537 „ 1877 

27,448,220 ,, 1882 

2,863,488 „ 1880 


295,113 
1,942,482 
6,194-588 
1,498,552 



After 1892 cattle, which in that year numbered 11,519,417, 
and sheep declined continuously for three years to the totals of 
1895, the diminution being mainly the result of the memorable 
drought of 1893. Sheep, which numbered 32,571,018 in 1878, 
declined continuously to 27,448,220 in 1882 — a loss of over five 
million head in five years. This was chiefly attributable to the 
ravages of the liver fluke which began in the disastrously wet 
season of 1879. Pigs, being prolific breeders, fluctuate more 
widely in numbers than cattle or sheep, for the difference of 
1,498,552 in their case represents one-third of the highest total, 
whereas the difference is less than one-seventh for horses, less 
than one-sixth for cattle, and less than one-fifth for sheep. The 

Table XII. — Numbers of Horses, Cattle, Sheep and Pigs in the 
United Kingdom. 



j Year. 


Horses. 


Cattle. 


Sheep. 


Pigs. 


' J875 


1,819,687 


10.162,787 


33,491,948 


3.495.167 


1880 


1,929,680 


9-871,153 


30,239,620 


2,863,488 


1885 


1,909,200 


10,868,760 


30,086,200 


3,686,628 


1890 


1-1964,911 


10,789,858 


31,667,195 


4,362,040 


1895 


2,112,207 


10,753.314 


29,774,853 


4,238,870 


j 1900 


2,000,402 


11,454,902 


31,054,547 


3,663,669 


J 905 


2,116,806 


11,674,019 


29,076,777 


3,601,659 



relative proportions — as distinguished from the actual numbers 
— in which stock are distributed over the several sections of the 
United Kingdom do not vary greatly from year to year. Table 
XIII., in which the totals for the United Kingdom include those 
for the Channel Islands and Isle of Man, illustrates the prepon- 
derance of the sheep-breeding industry in the drier climate of 

■ Great Britain, and of the cattle-breeding industry in the more 
humid atmosphere of Ireland. In Great Britain in 1905, for 

• every head of cattle there were about four head of sheep, whereas 
in Ireland the cattle outnumbered the sheep. Again,' whilst 

■ Great Britain possessed Only half as many cattle more than 

Table XIII. — Numbers of Horses, Cattle, Sheep and Pigs in the 
United Kingdom in 1905. 



1905. 


Horses. 


Cattle. 


Sheep. 


Pigs. 


England . 

Wales 
Scotland . 


1,204,124 
161,923 
206,386 


5,020,936 

738,789 
1,227,295 


14,698,018 

3,534,967 
7,024,211 


2,083,226 

211,479 
130,214 


Great Britain . 


1,572,433 


6,987,020 


25,257,196 


2,424,919 


Ireland 


534,875 


4,645,215 


3.749,352 


1,164,316 


United / 
Kingdom 1 ) 


2,116,800 


11,674,019 


29,076,777 


3,601,659 



Ireland, she possessed six times as many sheep. The cattle 
population of England alone slightly exceeded that of Ireland, 
but cattle are more at home on the broad plains of England than 
amongst the hills and mountains of Wales and Scotland, which 
are suitable for sheep. Hence, whilst in England sheep were not 
three times as numerous as cattle, in Wales they were nearly 
five times, and in Scotland nearly six times as many. Great 
Britain had twice as many pigs as Ireland, but the swine industry 
is mainly English and Irish, and England possessed more than 
six times as many pigs as Wales and Scotland together, the 
number in the last-named country being particularly small, 
'One English county alone, Suffolk, maintained more pigs than 
,the whole of Scotland. 

British Imports of Live A nimals and Meat. 
The stock-breeders and graziers of the United Kingdom have, 
' <equally with the corn-growers, to face the brunt of foreign 
competition. 

1 Including Channel Islands and Isle of Man. 



Up to 1896 store Cattle were admitted into the United King- 
dom for the purpose of being fattened, but under the Diseases 
of Animals Act of that year animals imported since then have 
to be slaughtered at the place of landing. The dimensions of 
this trade are shown in Table XIV, 

Table XI V. — Numbers of Cattle, Sheep and Pigs imported into, the 
United Kingdom, 1891-1905. 



Year. 


Cattle. 


Sheep. 


Pigs. 


1 89 1 


507,407 


■ 344,504 


542 


1892 


502,237 


.' 79,048 


3826 


1893 


340,045 ; 


62,682 


138 


1894 


475.440 


484,597 


8 


1895 


415.565 


1,065,470 


321 


1896 


562,553 


769,592 


4 


1897 


618,321 


611,504 




1898 


569,066 


663,747 


450 


1899 


503,504 


607,755 




1900 


495,645 


382,833 




1901 


495.635 


383,594 




1902 


419,488 


293,203 




1903 


522,546 


354-241 




1904 


549,532 


382,240 




1905 


565,139 


183,084 


150 



The ariimals come mainly from the United States of America, 
Canada and Argentina, and the traffic in cattle is more uniform 
than that in sheep, whilst that in pigs seems practically to have 
reached extinction. The quantities of dead meat imported 
increased with great rapidity from 1891 to 1905, a circumstance 
largely due to the rise of the trade in chilled and frozen meat. 
Fresh, beef in this form is imported chiefly from the United 
States and Australasia, fresh mutton from Australasia and 
Argentina. 

Table XV. shows how rapidly this trade expanded during the 
decade of the 'nineties. The column headed bacon and hams 
indicates clearly enough that the imports of fresh meat did not 
displace those of preserved pig meat, for the latter expanded from 
4,715,000 cwt. to 7,784,000 cwt. during the decade. The column 
for all dead meat includes not only the items tabulated, but also 

Table XV. -^-Quantities of Dead Meat imported into the United 
Kingdom, 1891-1905 — Thousands of Cwt. 



Year. 


Fresh. 


Fresh 


Fresh 


Bacon 


All 


Beef. 


Mutton. 


Pork. 


and Hams. 


Dead Meat. 


1891 


192 1 


1663 


128 


4715 


9,790 


1892 


2080 


1700 


132 


5135 


10,500 


1893 


1808 


1971 


182 


4187 


9,305 


1894 


2104 


2295 


180 


4819 


10,610 


1895 


2191 


261.1 


288 


5353 


11,977 


1896 


2660 


2895 


299 


6609 


13,347 


1897 


3010 


3193 


348 


6731 


14,729 


1898 


3101 


33H 


558 


7684 


16,445 


1899 


3803 


3446 


669 


7784 


17,658 ! 


1900 


4128 


3393 


695 


7444 


17,912 


1901 


4509 


3608 


792 


7633 


18,764 


1902 


3707 


3660 


655 


6572 


16,971 


1903 


4160 


4017 


706 


6298 


17,498 


1904 


4350 


3495 


610 


6696 


17.517 


1905 


5038 


3811 


506 


6817 


18,680 



the following, the quantities stated being those for 1905: — Beef, 
salted, 142,806 cwt.; beef, otherwise preserved,, 598,030 cwt.; 
preserved mutton, 30,111 cwt.; salted pork, 205,965 cwt.; dead 
rabbits, 656,078 cwt.; meat, unenumerated, 875,032 cwt. The 
quantities of these are relatively small, and, excepting rabbits 
from Australia, they show no general tendency to increase. The 
extent, to which these growing imports were associated with a 
decline in value is shown in Table XVI. 

The trend of the import trade in meat, live and dead (exclusive 
of rabbits) , may be gathered from Table XVII. , in which are given 
the annual average imports from the eight quinquennial periods 
embraced between 1866 and 1905. An increase in live cattle 
accompanied a decrease in live sheep and pigs, but the imports of 
dead meat expanded fifteen-fold over the period. 

The rate at which the trade in imported frozen mutton in- 
creased as compared with the industry in home-grown mutton 
is illustrated in the figures published annually by Messrs W. 



BRITISH] 



AGRICULTURE 



407 



Weddel and Company, from which those for 1885 and 1890 and 
for each year from 1895 to 1906 are given in Table XVIII. The 
home-grown is the estimated dead weight of sheep and lambs 
slaughtered, which is taken at 40 % of the total number of sheep 
and lambs returned each year in the United Kingdom. In the 

Table XVI. — Average Values of Fresh Meat, Bacon and Hams 
imported into the United Kingdom, 1891-1905 — per Cwt. 



Year. 


Fresh 
Beef. 


Fresh 
Mutton. 


Fresh 
Pork. 


Bacon. 


Hams. 




s. d. 


s. d. 


s. d. 


s. d. 


s. d. 


1891 


42 1 


39 6 


47 6 


37 11 


46 4 


1892 


42 5 


40 6 


46 11 


40 10 


47 4 


1893 


42 4 


39 3 


50 


53 


58 5 


1894 


40 


37 10 


48 5 


43 10 


49 1 


1895 


39 


35 2 


46 1 


39 


44 11 


1896 


37 10 


32 7 


45 " 


34 6 


43 ° 


1897 


38 5 


3° 3 


44 


35 5 


42 8 


1898 


38 2 


29 7 


41 10 


36 2 


39 6 


1899 


38 8 


31 7 


41 11 


35 10 


41 5 


1900 


39 7 


34 5 


43 


41 9 


46 10 


1901 


39 6 


36 7 


43 4 


47 1 


48 8 


1902 


42 8 


37 9 


44 2 


52 9 


52 1 


1903 


40 3 


39 


44 1 


52 10 


55 1 


1904 


37 1 


39 3 


45 2 


47 1 


49 11 


1905 


35 6 


38 6 


46 


46 6 


47 4 



imported column is given the weight of fresh (frozen) mutton and 
lamb imported, r3lus the estimated dead weight of the sheep 
imported on the hoof for slaughter. The quantity imported in 
1899 was double that in 1890, and quadruple that in 1885. More- 
over, in 1885 the imported product was only about one-seventh 

Table XVII. — Average Annual Imports of Cattle, Sheep and Pigs, 
and of Dead Meat, into the United Kingdom over eight ^-yearly 
Periods. 



Period. 


Cattle. 


Sheep. 


Pigs. 


Dead Meat. 




No. 


No. 


No. 


Cwt. 


1866-1870 


194.947 


610,300 


64,827 


1,155,867 


1871-1875 


215,990 


864,516 


74,040 


3,134,175 


1876-1880 


272,745 


938,704 


44,6i3 


5,841,913 


1881-1885 


387.282 


974,316 


24,355 


6,012,495 


1 886-1 890 


438,098 


800,599 


19,437 


7,681,729 


1891-1895 


448,139 


407,260 


967 


10,436,549 


1 896- 1 900 


549,818 


607,086 


91 


15,785,354 


1901-1905 


510,468 


319,272 


30 


17,384,366 



as much as the home-grown, whereas in 1890 it was more than 
one-fourth, and in 1906 close on two-thirds. This large import 
trade in fresh meat, which sprang up entirely within the last 
quarter of the 19th century, has placed an abundance of cheap 
and wholesome food well within the reach of the great industrial 

Table XVIII. — Home Product and Imports of Sheep and Mutton 
into the United Kingdom — Thousands of Tons. 



Year. 


Home- 
grown. 


Imported. 


Year. 


Home- 
grown. 


Imported. 


1885 


322 


47 


1900 


332 


179 


1890 


339 


92 


1901 


330 


191 


1895 


319 


157 


1902 


322 


191 


1896 


329 


164 


1903 


318 


210 1 


1897 


327 


175 


1904 


3" 


185 


1898 


333 


182 


1905 


312 


195 


1899 


339 


187 


1906 


313 


207 



populations of the United Kingdom. At the same time it cannot 
be gainsaid that it has opened the way to fraud. Butchers have 
palmed off upon their customers imported fresh meat as home- 
grown, and secured a dishonest profit by charging for it the prices 
of the latter, which are considerably in excess of those of the 
imported product. 

Sale of Cattle by Live Weight. 
In connexion with the internal live stock trade of Great Britain 
attention must be directed to the Markets and Fairs (Weighing 
of Cattle) Act 1891. The object of this measure is to replace the 

1 In 1903 two of the principal sources of supply of mutton shipped 
in excess of their exportable surplus, for which they suffered severely 
in 1904 — hence the somewhat irregular movements after 1903. 



old-fashioned system of guessing at the weight of an animal by 
the sounder method of obtaining the exact weight by means of 
the weighbridge. The grazier buys and sells cattle much less 
frequently than the butcher buys them, so that the latter is 
naturally more skilled in estimating the weight of a beast through 
the use of the eye and the hand. The resort to the weighbridge 
should put both on an equality, and its use tends to increase. 
Under the act, as supplemented by an Order of the Board of 
Agriculture in 1905, there were in that year 26 scheduled places 
in England and 10' in Scotland-, or 36 altogether, from which 
returns were obtained. The numbers of cattle (both fat and 
store) weighed at scheduled places in 1893 and 1905 2 were 
respectively 7-59 and 18 % of those entering those markets. The 
numbers for Scotland are greater throughout than those for 
England, 72 % of the fat cattle entering the scheduled markets "In 
Scotland in 1905 2 having been weighed, while in England the 
proportion was only 20 %. Little use is made of the weighbridge 
in selling store-cattle, sheep or swine. As the main object of 
the act is to obtain records of prices, it follows that only in so 
far as statements of the prices realized, together with the descripv 
tion of the animals involved, are obtained, is the full advan- 
tage of the statute secured. In 1905 the average price per cwt. 
for fat cattle in Great Britain was 32s. nd. as compared with 
35s. 2d. in 1900. 

Food-values and Early Maturity. 

In the feeding experiments which have been carried on 
at Rothamsted it has been shown that the amount consumed 
both for a given live weight of animal within a given time, and 
for the production of a given amount of increase, is, as current 
foodstuffs go, measurable more by the amounts they contain 
of digestible and available non-nitrogenous constituents than 
by the amounts of the digestible and available nitrogenous 
constituents they supply. The non-nitrogenous substance (the 
fat) in the increase in live weight of an animal is, at any rate in 
great part, if not entirely, derived from the non-nitrogenous 
constituents of the food. Of the nitrogenous compounds in food, 
on the other hand, only a small proportion of the whole consumed 
is finally stored up in the increase of the animal— in other words, 
a very large amount of nitrogen passes through the body beyond 
.that which is finally retained in the increase, and so remains 
for manure. Hence it is that the amount of food consumed to 
produce a given amount of increase in live weight, as well as that 
required for the sustentation of a given live weight for a given 
time, should — provided the food be not abnormally deficient 
in nitrogenous substance — be characteristically dependent on 
its supplies of digestible and available non-nitrogenous con- 
stituents. It has further been shown that, in the exercise of 
force by animals, there is a greatly increased expenditure of 
the non-nitrogenous constituents of food, but little, if any, of 
the nitrogenous. Thus, then, alike for maintenance, for increase, 
and for the exercise of force, the exigencies of the system are 
characterized more by the demand for the digestible non- 
nitrogerious or more specially respiratory and fat-forming con- 
stituents than by that for the nitrogenous or more specially 
flesh-forming ones. Hence, as current fattening food-stuffs 
go-^-assuming, of course, that they are not abnormally low in 
the nitrogenous constituents — they are, as foods, more valuable 
in proportion to their richness in digestible and available non- 
nitrogenous than to that of their. nitrogenous constituents. As, 
however, the manure of the animals of the farm is valuable 
largely in proportion to the nitrogen it contains, there is, so far, 
an advantage in giving a food somewhat rich in nitrogen, pro- 
vided it is in other respects a good one, and, weight for weight, 
not much more costly. 

The quantity of digestible nutritive matter in 1000 lb of 
ordinary feeding-stuffs when supplied to sheep or oxen is shown 
in Table XIX. This table is taken from Warington's Chemistry 
of the Farm, 19th edition (Vinton and Co.) , to which reference may 
be made for a detailed discussion of the feeding of animals. 

In the . fattening of animals for the butcher the principle of 
J Returns for only ten months were available for this year. 



408 



AGRICULTURE 



[BRITISH. 



early maturity has received full recognition. If the sole purpose 
for which an animal is reared is to prepare it for the block- — and 
this is the case with steers amongst cattle and with wethers 
amongst sheep — the sooner it is ready for slaughter the less 
should be the outlay involved. During the whole time the 
animal is living the feeder has to pay what has been termed the 
" life tax " — that is, so much of the food has to go to the main- 
tenance of the animal as a living organism, independently of 
that which may be undergoing conversion into what will sub- 
sequently be available in the form of beef or mutton. If a bullock 
can be rendered fit for the butcher at the age of two or three 
years, will the animal repay another year's feeding? It has 
been proved at the Christmas fat stock shows that the older a 
bullock gets the less will he gain in weight per day as a result 
of the feeding. With regard to this point the work of the Smith- 
field Club deserves recognition. This body was instituted in 
1798 as the Smithfield Cattle and Sheep Society, the title being 



Table XIX. — Digestible Matter in 1000 lb. of various Foods. 




i 


Total 


Nitrogenous 
Substances. 




Soluble 






Organic 
Matter. 






Fat. 


Carbo- 
hydrates. 


Fibre. 




Albu- 


Amides, 


1 




minoids. 


etc. 








Cotton cake (decorticated) . 


691 


374 


18 


128 


158 


13 


i ,, (undecorticated) 


422 


150 


13 


5° 


177 


32 


Linseed cake .... 


655 


230 


11 


103 


266 


45 


. Peas 




747 


175 


25 


12 


499 


36 


Beans 




, 733 


196 


28 


12 


446 


5 1 


Wheat 1 . 




786 


92 


13 


15 


656 


10 


Oats 




600 


81 


7 


45 


441 


26 


Barley 




715 


70 


4 


19 


607 


15 


Maize 


. 


786 


73 


6 


44 


651 


12 


Rice meal 




612 


67 


10 


102 


411 


22 


Wheat bran 




585 


90 


20 


27 ' 


426 


22 


Malt sprouts 




681 


114 


71 


11 


379 


106 


Brewers' grains 


137 


34 


2 


14 


67 


20 


(dried) . 


529 


136 


8 


57 


266 


62 


Pasture grass 


156 


19 


11 


6 


84 


36 


Clover (bloom beginning) . 


123 


17 


8 


5 


63 


30 


Clover hay (medium) . 


440 


47 


25 


13 


242 


113 


Meadow hay (best) 


5ii 


60 


18 


J 3 


269 


151 


„ (medium) 


485 


40 


12 


12 


269 


152 


„ (poor) . 


460 


29 


5 


10 


242 


174 


Maize silage .... 


124 


1 

V 


7 


7 


75 


34 


Bean straw .... 


412 


4 





6 


211 


155 


Oat straw . . 


38i 


7 


5 


7 


163 


199 


Barley straw .... 


426 


4 


3 


6 


211 


202 


Wheat straw .... 


35i' 


t 


1 


4 


150 


193 


Potatoes .... 


213 


5 


9 


1 


195 


3 


Mangels (large) 


89 


1 


8 


i 


74 


6 


„ (small) 


109 


2 


6 


1 
2 


96 


5 


Swedes .... 


87 


2 


7 


1 


71 


6 


Turnips . .... 


68 


1 


5 


1 


56 


s 



changed to that of the Smithfield Club in 1802. The original 
object — the supply'of the cattle markets of Smithfield and other 
places with the cheapest and best meat — is still kept strictly 
in view. The judges, in making their awards at the show held 
annually in December, at Islington, North London (since 1862), 
are instructed to decide according to quality of flesh, lightness 
of offal, age and early maturity, with no restrictions as to feeding, 
and thus to promote the primary aim of the club in encouraging 
the selection and breeding of the best and most useful animals 
for the production of meat, and testing their capabilities in respect 
of early maturity. At the first show, held at Smithfield in 1799, 
two classes were provided for cattle and two for sheep, the prizes 
offered amounting to £52 : 10s. In 1839 the classes comprised 
seven for cattle, six for sheep, and one for pigs, with prizes to 
the amount of £300. By 1862 the classes had risen to 29 for 
cattle, 17 for sheep and 4 for pigs, and the prize money to 
£2072. At the centenary show in 1898 provision was made for 
40 classes for cattle, 29 for sheep, 18 for pigs, and 7 for animals 
to be slaughtered, whilst to mark the importance of the occasion 
the prizes offered amounted to close upon £5000 m value. In 

1 In the absence of experiments it is assumed that wheat is 
digested like other foods of the same class. 



1907 there were 38 classes for cattle, 29 for sheep, 20 for pigs, 
and 1 2 for carcase competitors, and the value of the prizes was 
£4113. The sections provided for cattle are properly restricted 
to what may be termed the beef breeds; in the catalogue order 
they are Devon, South Devon, Hereford, Shorthorn, Sussex, 
Red Polled, Aberdeen-Angus, Galloway, Welsh, Highland, 
Cross-bred, Kerry and Dexter, and Small Cross-bred. 

It will be noticed that such characteristically milking breeds 
as the Ayrshire, Jersey and Guernsey have no place here. 
Provision is made, however, for all the well-known breeds of sheep 
and swine. In the cattle classes, aged beasts of huge size and 
of considerably over a ton in weight used to be common, but in 
recent years the tendency has been to reduce the upper limit of 
age, and thus to bring out animals ripe for the butcher in a shorter 
time than was formerly the case. An important step in this 
direction was taken in 1896, when the senior class for steers, 
viz. animals three to four years old, was abolished, the maximum 
age at which steers were allowed to compete 
for prizes being reduced. to three years. The 
cow classes were abolished in 1897, and in the 
schedule of the 1905 exhibition the classes for 
each breed of cattle were (1) for steers not 
exceeding two years old, (2) for steers above 
two years and not exceeding three years old, 
and (3) for heifers not exceeding three years 
old. The single exception is provided by the 
slowly-maturing Highland breed of cattle, for 
which classes were allotted to (1) steers not 
exceeding three years old, (2) steers or oxen 
above three years old (with no maximum 
limit), and (3) heifers not exceeding four 
years old. As illustrating heavy weights, 
there were in the 1893 show, out of 310 entries 
of cattle, four beasts which weighed over a 
ton. They were all steers of three to four 
years old, one being a Hereford weighing 20 
cwt. 2 qr. 4 lb, and the others Shorthorns 
weighing respectively 20 cwt. 2 qr., 20 cwt. 
3 qr. 21 lb, and 22 cwt. 2 qr. 18 lb. In the 
1895 show, out of 356 entries of cattle, there 
were seven beasts of more than a ton in 
weight. They were all three to four years 
old, and comprised four Shorthorns (top 
weight 21 cwt. 1 qr. 18 lb), one Sussex (22 
cwt. 3 qr. 7 lb), and two cross-breds (top 
weight 20 cwt. 3 qr. 24 lb). In the 1899 show, 
with 311 entries of cattle, and the age limited 
to three years, no beast reached the weight 
of a ton, the heaviest animal being a cross- 
bred(Aberdeen-Angus and Shorthorn) which,at 
three years old, turned the scale at 19 cwt. 1 qr. 5 lb. Out of 
301 entries in 1905 the top weight was 19 cwt. 1 qr. 25 lb in the 
case of a Shorthorn steer. Useful figures for purposes of com- 
parison are obtained by dividing the weight of a fat beast by 
the number of days in its age, the weight at birth being thrown 
in. The average daily gain in live weight is thus arrived at, and 
as the animal increases in age this average gradually diminishes, 
until the daily gain reaches a stage at which it does not afford 
any profitable return upon the food consumed. At the centenary 
show of the Smithfield Club in 1898 the highest average daily 
gains in weight amongst prize-winning cattle were provided by a 
Shorthorn- Aberdeen cross-bred steer (age, one year seven months; 
daily gain 2-47 lb); a Shorthorn steer (age, one year seven 
months; daily gain, 2-44 lb); and an Aberdeen-Shorthorn 
cross-bred steer (age, one year ten months; daily gain, 2-33^)). 
These beasts, it will be observed, were all under two years old. 
Amongst prize steers of two and a half to three years old, on the 
same occasion, the three highest daily average gains in live 
weight were 2-07 lb for an Aberdeen- Angus, 1-99 ft for a Short- 
horn-Aberdeen cross-bred and 1-97 lb for a Sussex. In the sheep 
section of the Smithfield show the classes for ewes were finally 
abolished in 1898, and the classes restricted to wethers and 



BRITISH] 



AGRICULTURE 



+09 



wether lambs, whose function is exclusively the production of 
meat. At the 1 905 show, sheep of each breed, and also cross-breds, 
competed as (1) wether lambs under twelve months old, and (2) 
wether sheep above twelve and under twenty-four months old. 
The only exception was in the case of the slowly-maturing 
Cheviot and mountain breeds, for which the second class was for 
wether sheep of any age above twelve months. Of prize sheep at 
the centenary show the largest average daily gain was 0-77 lb per 
head given by Oxford-Hampshire cross-bred wether lambs, aged 
nine months two weeks. In the case of wether sheep, twelve to 
twenty-four months old, the highest daily increase was o- 56 lb 
per head as yielded by Lincolns, aged twenty-one months. 
Within the last quarter of the 19th century the stock-feeding 
practices of the country were much modified in accordance with 
these ideas of early maturity. The three-year-old wethers and 
older oxen that used to be common in the fat stock markets 
are now rarely seen, excepting perhaps in the case of mountain 
breeds of sheep and Highland cattle. It was in 1875 that the 
Smithfield Club first provided the competitive classes for lambs, 
and in 1883 the champion plate offered for the best pen of sheep 
of any age in the show was for the first time won by lambs, a 
pen of Hampshire Downs. The young classes for bullocks were 
established in 1880. The time-honoured notion that an animal 
must have completed its growth before it could be profitably 
fattened is no longer held, and the improved breeds which now 
exist rival one another as regards the early period at which they 
may be made ready for the butcher by appropriate feeding and 
management. 

In 1895 the Smithfield Club instituted a carcase competition 
in association with its annual show of fat stock, and it has been 
continued each year since. The cattle and sheep entered for this 
competition are shown alive on the first day, at the close of which 
they are slaughtered and the carcases hung up for exhibition, 
with details of live and dead weights. The competition thus 
constitutes what is termed a " block test," and it is instructive 
in affording the opportunity of seeing the quality of the carcases 
furnished by the several animals, and in particular the relative 
proportion and distribution of fat and lean meat. The live 
animals are judged and subsequently the carcases, and, though the 
results sometimes agree, more often they do not. Tables are con- 
structed showing the fasted live weight, the carcase weight, and 
the weight of the various parts that are separated from and not 
included with the carcase. An abundance of lean meat and a 
moderate amount of fat well distributed constitutes a better 
carcase, and a more economical one for the consumer, than a 
carcase in which gross accumulations of fat are prominent. To 
add to the educational value of the display, information as to the 
methods of feeding would be desirable, as it would then be 
possible to correlate the quality of the meat with the mode of its 
manufacture. A point of high practical interest is the ratio of 
carcase weight to fasted live weight, and in the case of prize- 
winning carcases these ratios usually fluctuate within very narrow 
limits. At the 1899 show, for example, the highest proportion of 
the carcase weight to live weight was 68 % in the case of an 
Aberdeen- Angus steer and of a Cheviot wether, whilst the lowest 
was 61 %, afforded alike by a Shorthorn-Sussex cross-bred heifer 
and a mountain lamb. A familiar practical method of estimating 
carcase weight from live weight is to reckon one Smithfield stone 
(8 lb) of carcase for each imperial stone (14 lb) of live weight. 
This gives carcase weight as equal to 57 % of live weight, a 
ratio much inferior to the best results obtained at the carcase' 
competition promoted by the Smithfield Club. 

Breed Societies. 

A noteworthy feature of the closing decades of the 19th century 
was the formation of voluntary associations of stockbreeders, 
with the object of promoting the interests of the respective breeds 
of live stock. As a typical example of these organizations the 
Shire Horse Society may be mentioned. It was incorporated in 
1878 to improve and promote the breeding of the Shire or old 
English race of cart-horses, and to effect the distribution of sound 
and healthy sires throughout the country. The society holds 



annual shows, publishes annually the Shire Horse Stud Book and 
offers r gold and silver medals for competition amongst Shire 
horses at agricultural shows in different parts of the country. 
The society has carried on a work of high national importance, 
and has effected a marked improvement in the character and 
quality of the Shire horse. What has thus voluntarily been done 
in England would in most other countries be left to the state, or 
would not be attempted at all. It is hardly necessary to say that 
the Shire Horse Society has never received a penny of public 
money, nor has any other of the voluntary breeders' societies. 
The Hackney Horse Society and the Hunters' Improvement 
Society are conducted on much the same lines as the Shire Horse 
Society, and, like it, they each hold a show in London in the 
spring of the year and publish an annual volume. Other horse- 
breeders' associations, all doing useful work in the interests of 
their respective breeds, are the Suffolk Horse Society, the 
Clydesdale Horse Society, the Yorkshire Coach Horse Society, 
the Cleveland Bay Horse Society, the Polo Pony Society, the 
Shetland Pony Stud Book Society, the Welsh Pony and Cob 
Society and the New Forest Pony Association. Thoroughbred 
race-horses are registered in the General Stud Book. The Royal 
Commission on Horse Breeding, which dates from 1887, is, as its 
name implies, not a voluntary organization. Through the com- 
mission the money previously spent upon Queen's Plates is 
offered in the form of " King's Premiums " (to the number of 
twenty-eight in 1907) of £150 each for thoroughbred stallions, on 
condition that each stallion winning a premium shall serve not 
less than fifty half-bred mares, if required. The winning stallions 
are distributed in districts throughout Great Britain, and the use 
of these selected sires has resulted in a decided improvement in 
the quality of half-bred horses. The annual show of the Royal 
Commission on Horse Breeding is held in London jointly and 
concurrently with that of the Hunters' Improvement Society. 

Of organizations of cattle-breeders the English Jersey Cattle 
Society, established in 1878, may be taken as a type. It offers 
prizes in butter-test competitions and milking trials at various 
agricultural shows, and publishes the English Herd Book and 
Register of Pure-bred Jersey Cattle. This volume records the 
births in the herds of members of the society, and gives the 
pedigrees of cows and bulls, besides furnishing lists of prize- 
winners at the principal shows and butter-test awards, and 
reports of sales by auction of Jersey cattle. Other cattle 
societies, all well caring for the interest of their respective breeds, 
are the Shorthorn Society of Great Britain and Ireland, the 
Lincolnshire Red Shorthorn Association, the Hereford Herd Book 
Society, the Devon Cattle Breeders' Society, the South Devon 
Herd Book Society, the Sussex Herd Book Society, the Long- 
horned Cattle Society, the Red Polled Society, the English 
Guernsey Cattle Society, the English Kerry and Dexter Cattle 
Society, the Welsh Black Cattle Society, the Polled Cattle 
Society (for the Aberdeen- Angus breed), the English Aberdeen- 
Angus Cattle Association, the Galloway Cattle Society, the Ayr- 
shire Cattle Herd Book Society, the Highland Cattle Society of 
Scotland and the Dairy Shorthorn Association. 

In the case of sheep the National Sheep Breeders' Association 
looks after the interests of flockmasters in general, whilst most 
of the pure breeds are represented also by separate organizations. 
The Hampshire Down Sheep Breeders' Association may be taken 
as a type of the latter, its principal object being to encourage the 
breeding of Hampshire Down sheep at heme and abroad, and to 
maintain the purity of the breed. It publishes an annual Flock 
Book, the first volume of which appeared in 1890. In this book 
are named the recognized and pure-bred sires which have been 
used, and ewes which have been bred from, whilst there are also 
registered the pedigrees of such sheep as are proved to be eligible 
for entry. Prizes are offered by the society at various agri- 
cultural shows where Hampshire Down sheep are exhibited. 
Other sheep societies include the Leicester Sheep Breeders' 
Association, the Cotswold Sheep Society, the Lincoln Longwool 
Sheep Breeders' Association, the Oxford Down Sheep Breeders' 
Association, the Shropshire Sheep Breeders' Association and 
Flock Book Society, the Southdown Sheep Society, the Suffolk 



4io 



AGRICULTURE 



[BRITISH; 



Sheep Society, the Border Leicester Sheep Breeders' Society, the 
Wensleydale Longwool Sheep Breeders' Association and Flock 
Book Society, the Incorporated Wensleydale Blue-faced Sheep 
Breeders' Association and Flock Book Society, the Kent Sheep 
Breeders' Association, the Devon Longwool Sheep Breeders' 
Society, the Dorset Horn Sheep Breeders' Association, the 
Cheviot Sheep Society and the Roscommon Sheep Breeders' 
Association. 

The interests of pig-breeders are the care of the National Pig- 
Breeders' Association, in addition to which there exist the 
British Berkshire, the Large Black Pig, and the Lincoln Curly- 
Coated White Pig Societies, and the Incorporated Tamworth Pig 
Breeders' Association. 

The addresses of the secretaries of the various live-stock 
societies in the United Kingdom are published annually in the 
Live Stock Journal Almanac. 

The Maintenance of the Health of Live Stock. 

It was not till the closing decade of the 19th century that the 
stock-breeders of the United Kingdom found themselves in a 
position to prosecute their industry free from the fear of the 
introduction of contagious, disease through the medium of store 
animals imported from abroad for fattening on the native pas- 
tures. By the Diseases of Animals Act 1896 (59' & 60 Vict. c. 15) 
it was provided that cattle, sheep and pigs imported into the 
United Kingdppi should be slaughtered at the place of landing. 
The effect was to reduce to a minimum the risk of the introduction 
of disease amongst the herds and flocks of the country, and at the 
same time to confine the trade in store stock exclusively to the 
breeders of Great Britain and Ireland. This arrangement makes 
no difference to the food-supply of the people, for dead meat 
continues to arrive at British ports in ever-increasing quantity. 
Moreover, live animals are admitted freely from certain coun- 
tries, provided such animals are slaughtered at the place of 
landing. At Deptford, for example, large numbers of cattle and 
sheep which thus arrive — mainly from Argentina, Canada and 
the United States — are at once slaughtered, and so furnish a 
steady supply of fresh-killed beef and mutton. The animals 
which are shipped in this way are necessarily of the best quality, 
because the freight on a superior beast is no more costly than on 
an inferior one, and the proportion of freight to sale price is there- 
fore less With this superior description of butchers' stock all 
classes of home-grown stock — good, bad and indifferent — have, 
of course, to compete. The Board of Agriculture has the power 
to close the ports of the United Kingdom against live animals 
from any country in which contagious disease is known to exist. 
This accounts for the circumstance that so few countries — none 
of them in Europe — enjoy the privilege of sending live animals to 
British ports. In 1900 the discovery early in the year of the 
existence of foot-and-mouth disease amongst cattle and sheep 
shipped from Argentina to the United Kingdom led to the issue 
of an order by which all British ports were closed against live 
animals from the country named. This order came into force on 
the 30th of April, and the result was a marked decline in the 
shipments of live cattle and sheep from the River Plate, but a 
decided increase in the quantity of frozen meat sent thence to the 
United Kingdom. 

The last quarter of the 19th century witnessed an important 
change in the attitude of "public opinion towards legislative 
control over the contagious diseases of animals. When, after 
the introduction of cattle plague or rinderpest in 1865, the 
proposal was made to resort to the extreme remedy of slaughter 
in order to check the ravages of a disease which was pursuing 
its course with ruinous results, the idea was received with public 
indignation and denounced as barbarous. Views have undergone 
profound modification since, then, and the most drastic remedy 
has come to be regarded as the most effective, and in the long 
run the least costly. The Cattle Diseases Prevention Act 1866 
(29 & 30 Vict. c. 2) made compulsory the slaughter of diseased 
cattle, and permitted the slaughter of cattle which had been 
exposed to infection, compensation being provided out of the 
rates. The Act 30 & 31 Vict. c. 125, 1867, is of historical interest, 



in that it contains the first mention of pleuro-pneumonia, and the 
exposure in any market of cattle suffering from that disease 
was made an offence. The Contagious Diseases (Animals) Act 
1869 (32 & 33 Vict. c. 70) revoked all former acts, and defined 
disease to mean cattle plague, pleuro-pneumonia, foot-and-mouth 
disease, sheep-pox, sheep-scab and glanders, together with any 
disease which the Privy Council might by order specify. The 
principle of this act in regard to foreign animals was that of 
free importation, with power for the Privy Council to prohibit 
or subject to quarantine and slaughter, as circumstances seemed 
to require. The act of 1869 was at that time the most complete 
measure that had ever, been passed for dealing with diseases 
of animals. The re-introduction of cattle plague into England 
in 1877 led to the passing of the Act 41 & 42 Vict. c. 74, 1878, 
which repealed the act of 1869, and affirmed as a principle the 
landing of foreign animals for slaughter only, though free im- 
portation or quarantine on the one hand and prohibition on the 
other were provided for in ■ exceptional circumstances. By an 
order of council which came into operation in December 1878, 
swine fever was declared to be a disease for the purposes of the 
act of that year. It was not, however, till October 1886 that 
anthrax and rabies were officially declared to be contagious 
diseases for the purposes of certain sections of the act of 1878. 
In 1884 the Act 47 & 48 Vict. c. 13 empowered the Privy Council 
to prohibit the landing of animals from any country in respect 
of which the circumstances were not such as to afford reason- 
able security against the introduction of foot-and-mouth disease. 
After one or two other measures of minor importance came the 
Act 53 & 54 Vict. c. 14, known as the Pleuro-pneumonia Act 
1890, which transferred the powers of local authorities to slaughter 
and pay compensation in cases of pleuro-pneumonia to the Board 
of Agriculture, and provided further for the payment of such 
compensation out of money specifically voted by parliament. 
This measure was regarded at the time as a marked step in 
advance, and was only carried after a vigorous campaign in its 
favour. In 1892 by the Act 55 & 56 Vict. c. 47 power was given 
to the Board of Agriculture to use the sums voted on account 
of pleuro-pneumonia for paying the costs involved in dealing 
with foot-and-mouth disease; under this act the board could 
order the slaughter of diseased animals and of animals in contact 
with these, and could pay compensation for animals so slaughtered. 
Under the provisions of the Contagious Diseases (Animals) Act 
1893 (56 & 57 Vict. c. 43) swine fever in Great Britain was, from 
the 1st of November in that year, dealt with by the Board of 
Agriculture in the same way as pleuro-pneumonia, the slaughter 
of infected swine being carried out under directions from the 
central authority, and compensation allowed from the imperial 
exchequer. In 1894 was passed the Diseases of Animals Act 
(57 & 58 Vict. c. 57), the word "contagious" being omitted 
from the title. This was a measure to consolidate the Contagious 
Diseases (Animals) Acts 1878-1893. In it "the expression 
' disease ' means cattle plague (that is to say, rinderpest, or the 
disease commonly called cattle plague), contagious pleuro- 
pneumonia of cattle (in this act called pleuro-pneumonia), 
foot-and-mouth disease, sheep-pox, sheep-scab, or swine fever 
(that is to say, the disease known as typhoid fever of swine, 
soldier purples, red disease, hog cholera or swine plague)." The 
Diseases of Animals Act 1896 (59 & 60 Vict. c. 15) rendered 
compulsory the slaughter of imported live stock at the place 
of landing, a boon for which British stock-breeders had striven 
for many years. The ports in Great Britain at which foreign 
animals may be landed are Bristol, Cardiff, Glasgow, Hull, Livers- 
pool, London,\ Manchester and Newcastle-upon-Tyne. Animals 
from the Channel Islands may be landed at Southampton. 

The Diseases of Animals. 

Under the Diseases of Animals Acts 1894 and 1896 weekly 
returns are issued by the Board of Agriculture of outbreaks of 
anthrax, foot-and-mouth disease, glanders (including farcy), 
pleuro-pneumonia, rabies and swine fever in the counties of 
Great Britain; also monthly returns of outbreaks of sheep-scab. 

Cattle plague, or rinderpest, has not been recorded in Great 



BRITISH] 



AGRICULTURE 



411 



Britain since 1877. In that year there were 47 outbreaks dis- 
tributed over five counties and involving 263 head of cattle. 

The course of foot-and-mouth disease in Great Britain between 
1877 and 1905 inclusive is told in Table XX., from which the 

Table XX. — Outbreaks of Foot-and- Mouth Disease in Great Britain, 
1877-1905. 







Out- 


Animals attacked. 


Year. 


Counties. 


breaks. 


Cattle. 


Sheep. 


Swine. 


Other 
Animals. 


1877 


55 


858 


5.640 


7.405 


2,099 




1878 


45 


235 


912 


8,609 


245 




1879 


29 


137 


261 


15.681 


5 




1880 


38 


1,461 


20,918 


9,572 


1,886 


2 


1881 


49 


4,833 


59.484 


117. !52 


6,330 


80 


1882 


49 


1.97° 


23.973 


11,412 


2,564 


1 


1883 


75 


18,732 


219,289 


217,492 


24.332 


32 


1884 


55 


949 


12,186 


14,174 


1,860 


1 


1885 


10 


30 


354 


34 


30 




1886 


1 


1 


10 








1892 


15 


95 


1,248 


3.412 


107 




1893 


2 


2 


30 








1894 


3 


3 


7 


261 






1900 


9 


21 


. 214 


50 


2 




1901 


3 


12 


43 


626 






1902 


1 


1 


2 


118 







years 1887 to 1891, 1895 to 1899 an d 1003 to 1905 inclusive 
are omitted, because there was no outbreak during those periods. 
The disease is seen to have attained its maximum virulence in 
1883. 

Sheep-scab is a loathsome skin disease due to an acarian 
parasite. Table XXI. shows the number of outbreaks and the 
number of counties over which they were distributed from 
1877 to 1905. The recorded outbreaks were more numerous 
in the decade of the 'nineties than in that of the 'eighties, though 
possibly this may have been due to greater official activity in 
the later period. The largest number of sheep attacked was 

Table XXI. — Outbreaks of Sheep-Scab in Great Britain, 
1877-1905. 



Year. 


Counties. 


Outbreaks. J Year. 


Counties. 


Outbreaks. 


1877 
1880 
1885 


77 
70 
69 


3214 
1556 
1512 


1890 

1895 
1900 

1905 


75 
88 

78 
73 


1506 
3092 

1939 
918 



68,715 (in 1877). It is compulsory on owners to notify the 
authorities as to the existence of scab amongst their sheep. By 
the Diseases of Animals Act (1003) powers to prescribe the dipping 
of sheep, irrespective of the presence or otherwise of sheep scab, 
were conferred upon the Board of Agriculture. An inspector 
of the board or of the local authority was by the same act 
authorized to enter premises and examine sheep. Each year 
the disorder runs a similar course, the outbreaks dwindling to 
a minimum in the summer months, June to August, and attaining 
a maximum in the winter months, December to February. It 
is chiefly in the " flying " flocks and not in the breeding flocks 
that the disease is rife, and it is so easily communicable that a 
drove of scab-infested sheep passing along a road may leave 
behind them traces sufficient to set up the disorder in a drove - 
of healthy sheep that may follow. For its size and in relation 
to its sheep population Wales harbours the disease to a far 
greater extent than the other divisions of Great Britain. 

The fatal disease known as anthrax did not form the subject of 
official returns previous to the passing of the Anthrax Order of 
1886. Isolated outbreaks are of common occurrence, and from 
the totals for Great Britain given in Table XXII. it would appear 
that there is little prospect of the eradication of this bacterial 
disorder. 

Glanders (including farcy) was the subject during the twenty- 
four years 1877-1900 of outbreaks in Great Britain ranging 
between a minimum of 518 in 1877 and a maximum of 1657 in 
1892; in the former year 758 horses were attacked, and in the 
latter 3001. A recrudescence of the disease marked the closing 
years of the 19th century, the outbreaks having been 748 in 1898, 



853 in 1899 and 1119 in 1900. The counties of Great Britain 
over which the annual outbreaks have been distributed have 
ranged between 24 in 1890 and 52 in 1879. As a matter of fact, 

Table XXII. — Outbreaks of Anthrax in Great Britain, 
1895-1905. 



Year. 


Counties. 


Outbreaks. 


Animals attacked. 


Cattle. 


Sheep. 


Swine. 


Horses. 


1895 
1896 

1897 
1898 
1899 
1900 
1901 
1902 
1903 
1904 
1905 


66 
64 
67 
73 
67 
74 
63 
7i 
78 
77 
84 


434 
488 

433 
556 
534 
571 
651 
678 
767 
1049 
970 


604 
632 
521 
634 
634 
668 
708 
746 
809 

III5 

IOOI 


158 
34 
39 
22 
69 
40 
76 
50 
48 
62 

53 : 


140 
200 
284 
161 

253 
204 

152 
192 

234 
365 
210 


32 
38 
38 
39 
30 
44 
35 
44 
51 
47 
53 



however, the disease is strongly centred upon the metropolitan 
area, more than half of the outbreaks being reported from the 
county of London alone. 

The Rabies order was passed in 1886, and the number of 
counties in Great Britain in which cases of rabies in dogs were 
reported in each subsequent year is shown in Table XXIII. 
In addition there have been some cases of rabies in animals other, 
than dogs. The disease was very rife in 1895, but the extensive 
application of the muzzling restrictions of the Board of Agri- 
culture was accompanied by so steady a diminution in the 

Table XXIII. — Cases of Rabies in Dogs in Great Britain, 
1887-1902. 



Year. 


Counties. 


Cases. 


Year. 


Counties. 


Cases. 


1887 


28 


217 


1895 


29 


672 


1888 


19 


160 


1896 


41 


438 


1889 


20 


312 


1897 


30 


151 


1890 


20 


129 


1898 


10 


17 


1891 


17 


79 


1899 


4 


9 


1892 


12 


38 


1900 


2 


6 


1893 


18 


93 


1901 


1 


1 


1894 


17 


248 


1902 


4 


13 



prevalence of the disease, that it was thought the latter had been 
extirpated. The entire revocation of the muzzling order, which 
accordingly followed, proved, however, to be premature, and 
it became necessary to reimpose it in the districts where it had 
last been operative, namely, certain parts of South Wales. No 
cases were reported in 1903, 1904 or 1905. 

Pleuro-pneumonia in Great Britain was dealt with by the 
local authorities up to the year 1890. Between 1870 and 1889 
the annual outbreaks had ranged between a minimum of 312 
in 1884 and a maximum of 3262 in 1874, the largest number of 
cattle attacked in any one year being 7983 in 1872. The largest 
number of counties over which the outbreaks were distributed 
was 72 in 1873. On the 1st of September 1890 the Board of 
Agriculture assumed powers with respect to pleuro-pneumonia 
under the Diseases of Animals Act of that year. Their adminis- 
tration was attended by success, for from 192 outbreaks in 
Great Britain in 1891 the total fell to 35 in 1892 and to 9 in 
1893. In the four subsequent years, 1894-1897, the outbreaks 
numbered 2, 1, 2. and 7 respectively. In January 1898 
an outbreak was discovered in a London cow-shed. This 
proved to be the last case in the 19th century of what at one 
time had been a veritable scourge to cattle-owners and a source 
of heavy financial loss. 

Between 1879 and 1892 inclusive, administration with regard 
to swine-fever was entrusted to local authorities. The largest 
number of outbreaks reported in any one of those years was 
7926 in 1885, and the smallest 1717 in 1881. In 1893 the Board 
of Agriculture took over the management, and Table XXIV. 
shows the number of counties in which swine-fever existed, the 
number of outbreaks confirmed and the number of swine 
slaughtered by order of the board in each year since. The trouble 
with this disease has been mainly in England, the outbreaks in 



412 



AGRICULTURE 



[BRITISH 



Wales and Scotland being comparatively few. What are termed 

" swine-fever infected areas " are scheduled by the board when 

and where circumstances seem to require, and the movement 

Table XXIV. — Outbreaks of Swine Fever in Great Britain, 

1894-1905. 







Outbreaks 
confirmed . 


Swine slaughtered as 


Year. 


Counties. 


diseased, or as having been 
exposed to infection. 


1894 


73 


.5682 


56,296 


1895 


73 


6305 


69,931 


1896 


77 


5166 , 


79,586 


1897 


74 


2155 


40,432 


1898 


72 


25H 


43,756 


1899 


7i 


2322 


30,797 


1900 


62 


1940 


17,933 


1901 


71 


3HO 


15,237 


1902 


67 


1688 


8,263 


1903 


63 


1478 


7,933 


1 9O4 


64 


1 196 


5,603 


1905 


58 


817 


3,876 



of swine within such areas is prohibited, much inconvenience to 
trade resulting from restrictions of this kind. Frequently, more- 
over, the exhibition of pigs at agricultural shows has to be 
abandoned in consequence of these swine-fever, regulations. 

The Trade in Live Stock between Ireland and Great Britain. 

The compulsory slaughter at the place of landing does not 
extend to animals shipped from Ireland into Great Britain, and 
this is a matter of the highest importance to Irish stock-breeders, 
who find their best market close at hand on the east of St George's 
Channel. Table XXV. shows the number of cattle, sheep and 
pigs shipped from Ireland into Great Britain in each of the 
fifteen years 1891-1905, the numbers of horses similarly 
shipped being also indicated. On the average rather more than 
half the total of cattle is made up of store animals for fattening 
or breeding purposes, the fattening of Irish stores being a busi- 
ness of considerable magnitude in Norfolk and other counties. 
Calves constitute about one-twelfth of the total number of cattle. 

Table XXV. — Imports of Live Stock from Ireland into Great 
Britain, 1 891-1905. 



Year. 


Cattle. 


Sheep. 


Pigs. 


Horses. 


1891 


630,802 


893,175 


503,584 


33,396 


1892 


624,457 


1,080,202 


500,951 


32,481 


1893 


688,669 


1,107,960 


456,571 


30,390 


1894 


826,954 


957,ioi 


584,967 


33,589 


1895 


791,607 


652,578 


547,220 


34,560 


1896 


681,560 


737-3o6 


610,589 


39,856 


1897 


746,012 


804,515 


695,307 


38,422 


1898 


803,362 


833,458 


588,785 


38,804 


1899 


772,272 


871,953 


688,553 


42,087 


1900 


745,519 


862,263 


715,202 


35,6o6 


1901 


642,638 


843,325 


596,129 


25,607 


1902 


959.241 


1,055,802 


637,972 


25,260 


1903 


897,645 


825,679 


569,920 


27,719 


1904 


772,363 


739,266 


505,080 


27,500 


1905 


749,131 


700,626 


363,823 


30,723 



Most of the pigs sent from Ireland into Great Britain are fat, 
the store pigs accounting for less than one-tenth of the total 
number. The returns from Ireland under the Diseases of Animals 
Acts 1894 and 1896 are less significant than those of Great 
Britain. Thus, in the year ending June 1903, they included 
4 outbreaks of anthrax, 219 of swine-fever and 343 of sheep- 
scab, while there were no cases of rabies. Compared with the 
export trade in live stock from Ireland to Great Britain the 
reciprocal trade from Great Britain to Ireland is small, and is 
largely restricted to animals for breeding purposes. Owing to 
the reappearance of foot-and-mouth disease in Great Britain 
early in 1900 the importation of cattle, sheep, goats and swine 
therefrom into Ireland was temporarily suspended by the 
authorities in the latter country. 

Exports of Animals from the United Kingdom. 
The general export trade of the United Kingdom in living 
animals represented an aggregate average annual value over the 



five years 1896-1900 of £1,017,000 as against £935,801 over the 
five years 1901-1905. To these sums the value of horses alone 
contributed about three-fourths, Belgium taking more than half 
the number of exported horses. The export trade in cattle, 
sheep and pigs is practically restricted to pedigree animals 
required for breeding purposes, and though its aggregate value 

Table XXVI. — Quantities and Value of Home-bred Live Stock 
exported from the United Kingdom, 1900-1905. 



Year. 


Horses. 


Cattle. 


Sheep. 


Pigs. 


Other 
Animals. 


1900 
1901 
1902 

1903 
1904 

1905 


30,038 
27,612 
30,032 
34,798 
32,955 
47,7o8 


2,742 
1,648 
2,428 
2,736 
3,3" 
3,938 


4,934 
2,761 

3,596 
5,579 
8,142 

8,378 


435 
378 
515 
776 

732 
93i 


75,642 
68,012 
60,941 

52,095 
50,873 

50,307 


1900 
1901 
1902 
1903 
1904 
1905 


£ 
681,927 
605,699 
635,661 
734,598 
581,339 
875,647 


£ 
"8,337 

61,812 

96,153 
140,244 
146,210 
190,406 


£ 
53,306 

25,727 
29,069 
67,758 
88,421 
133,413 


£ 
3032 
3437 
5053 
7053 
7850 
8024 


£ 
45,241 
45,476 
56,691 
48,335 

43,868 
41,061 



is not large it is of considerable importance to stock-breeders, as 
it is a frequent occurrence for buyers for export — to Argentina, 
Australasia, Canada, the United States and elsewhere — to bid 
freely at the sale rings, and often to pay the highest prices, thus 
stimulating the sales and encouraging the breeding of the best 
types of native stock. Details for the six years 1 900-1 905 are 
summarized in Table XXVI. 

.Implements and Machinery. 

It is the custom of the Royal Agricultural Society of England 
to invite competitions at its annual shows in specified classes 
of implements, and an enumeration of these will indicate the 
character of the appliances which were thus brought into pro- 
minence in the latter years of the 19th and the early years of the 
20th century. These trials taking place, with few intermissions, 
year after year serve to direct the public mind to the develop- 
ment, which is continually in progress, of the mechanical aids 
to agriculture. The awards here summarized are quite distinct 
from those of silver medals which are given by the society in 
the case of articles possessing sufficient merit, which are entered 
as " new implements for agricultural or estate purposes." 

In 1875, at Taunton, special prizes were awarded for one- 
horse and two-horse mowing-machines, hay-making machines, 
horse-rakes (self-acting and not self-acting), guards to the drums 
of threshing-machines, and combined guards and feeders to the 
drums of threshing-machines. In 1876, at Birmingham, the 
competitions were of self -delivery reapers, one-horse ■ reapers 
and combined mowers and reapers without self-delivery. In 

1878, at Bristol, the special awards were all for dairy appliances 
—milk-can for conveying milk long distances, churn for milk, 
churn for cream, butter-worker for large dairies, butter- 
worker for small dairies, cheese-tub, curd knife, curd mill, 
cheese-turning apparatus, automatic means of preventing 
rising of cream, milk-cooler and cooling vat. A gold medal 
was awarded for a harvester and self-binder (McCormick's). In 

1879, at Kilburn, the competition was of railway waggons to 
convey perishable goods long distances at low temperatures. 
In 1880 at Carlisle, and in 1881 at Derby, the special awards 
were for broadside steam-diggers and string sheaf-binders re- 
spectively. In 1882, at Reading, a gold medal was given for a 
cream separator for horse power, whilst a prize of 100 guineas 
offered for the most efficient and most economical method of 
drying hay or corn crops artificially, either before or after being 
stacked, was not awarded. In 1883, at York, a prize of £50 was 
given for a butter dairy suitable for not more than twenty cows. 
In 1884, at Shrewsbury, a prize of £100 was awarded for a sheaf- 
binding reaper, and one of £50 for a similar machine. In 1885, 
at Preston, the competitions were concerned with two-horse, 
three-horse and four-horse whipple-trees, and packages for 



BRITISH] 



AGRICULTURE 



413 



conveying fresh butter by rail. In 1886, at Norwich, a prize of 
£25 was awarded for a thatch-making machine. In 1887, at 
Newcastle-on-Tyne, a prize of £200 went to a compound portable 
agricultural engine, one of £100 to a simple portable agricultural 
engine, and lesser prizes to a weighing-machine for horses and 
cattle, a weighing-machine for sheep and pigs, potato-raisers 
and one-man-power cream separators. In 1888, at Nottingham, 
hay and straw presses for steam-power, horse-power and hand- 
power were the subjects of competition. In 1889, at Windsor, 
prizes were awarded for a fruit and vegetable evaporator, a 
paring and coring machine, a dairy thermometer, parcel post 
butter-boxes to carry different weights, and a vessel to contain 
preserved butter. In 1890, at Plymouth, competitions took 
place of light portable engines (a) using solid fuel, (6) using 
liquid or gaseous fuel, grist mills for use on a farm, disintegrators, 
and cider-making plant for use on a farm. In 1891, at Doncaster, 
jpecial prizes were given for combined portable threshing and 
Snishing machines, and cream separators (hand and power). 
In 1892, at Warwick, the competitions related to ploughs- 
single furrow (a) for light land, (b) for strong land, (c) for 
press drill and broad-cast sowing; two-furrow; three-furrow; 
digging (a) for light land, (b) for heavy land; and one-way 
ploughs. In 1893, at Chester, self-binding harvesters and 
sheep-shearing machines (power) were the appliances respec- 
tively in competition. In 1894, at Cambridge, the awards 
were for fixed atnd portable oil engines, potato-spraying and 
tree-spraying machines, sheep-dipping apparatus and churns. 
In 1895, at Darlington, the competitions were confined to 
hay-making machines and clover-making machines. In 1896, 
at Leicester, prizes were awarded after trial to potato- 
planting machines, potato-raising machines and butter-drying 
machines. In 1897, at Manchester, special awards were made 
for fruit baskets and milk- testers. In 1898, at Birmingham, a 
prize of £ioo was given for a self-moving vehicle for light loads, 
£100 and £50 for self-moving vehicles for heavy loads, and £10 
for safety feeder to chaff-cutter, in accordance with the Chaff- 
cutting Machines (Accidents) Act 1897. In 1899, at Maidstone, 
special prizes were offered for machines for washing hops with 
liquid insecticides, cream separators (power and hand) , machines 
for the evaporation of fruit and vegetables, and packages for 
the carriage of (a) soft fruit, (b) hard fruit. In 1900, at York, 
the competitions were concerned with horse-power cultivators, 
self-moving steam diggers, milking machines and sheep-shearing 
machine*' (power and hand). In 1901, at Cardiff, competition 
was invited in portable oil engines, agricultural locomotive oil 
engines and small ice-making plant suitable for a dairy. In the 
years 1903 and 1904 petrol motors adapted for ploughing and 
other agricultural operations formed a prominent feature of the 
exhibits. 

The progress of steam cultivation has not justified the hopes 
that were once entertained in the United Kingdom concerning 
this method of working implements in the field. It was about 
the year 1870 that its advantages first came into prominent 
notice. At that time, owing to labour disputes, the supply of 
hands was short and horses were dear. The wet seasons that set 
in at the end of the 'seventies led to so much hindrance in the 
work on the land that the aid of steam was further called for, and 
it seemed probable that there would be a lessened demand for 
horse power. It was found, however, that the steam work was 
done with less care than had been bestowed upon the horse 
tillage, and the result was that steam came to be regarded as an 
auxiliary to horse labour rather than as a substitute for it. In 
this capacity it is capable of rendering most valuable assistance, 
for it can be utilized in moving extensive areas of land in a very 
short time. Accordingly, when a few days occur early in the 
season favourable to the working of the land, much of it can be 
got into a forward condition, whilst horses are set free for the 
lighter operations. The crops can then be sown in due time, 
which in wet years, and with the usual teams of horses kept on 
a farm, is not always practicable. Much advantage arises from 
the steam working of bastard fallows in summer, and after 
harvest a considerable amount of autumn cultivation can be 



done by steam power, thus materially lightening the work in the 
succeeding spring. On farms of moderate size it is usual to hire 
steam tackle as required, the outlay involved in the purchase 
of a set being justifiable only in the case of estates or of very 
big farms where, when not engaged in ploughing, or in culti- 
vating, or in other work upon the land, the steam-engine may 
be employed in threshing, chaff-cutting, sawing and many 
similar operations which require power. The labour question 
again became acute in the early years of the 20th century, when, 
owing to the scarcity of hands and the high rate of wages, self- 
binding harvesters were resorted to in England for the ingather- 
ing of the corn crops to a greater extent than ever before. For 
the same reason potato-planting and potato-lifting machines 
were also in greater requisition. 

Agricultural Population and Wages. 

The last half of the 19th century witnessed a remarkable 
diminution of the British rural population. The decrease has 
assumed serious proportions since 187 1, as before that date the 
supply of rural labour exceeded the demand. A large number of 
agricultural labourers were thus only in partial employment, and 
their withdrawal from the land was of minor importance as com- 
pared with the shrinkage in the number of those permanently 
employed. The following tables indicate the extent of rural 
depopulation: — 

Number of " Persons engaged in Agriculture " in the United 
Kingdom, 1851-1901. 



1851. 


1861. 


1871. 


1881. 


1891. 


1901. 


3.453.500 


3,080,500 


2,744,000 


2,573.9°° 


2.394.5°° 


2,262,600 


The number of " agricultural labourers and shepherds," which 
affords a more precise index, declined in a still more marked degree. 


1 85 1. 


186I. 


1871. 


1881. 


1891. 


1901. 


1,110,311 


' 1,098,261 


923,332 | 830,452 


756,557 


609,105 



The decrease in the demand for labour is attributable chiefly to 
the reduction of the cultivated area and the laying down to pasture 
of land" once under the plough, and to the increasing use of agri- 
cultural machinery. It may, however, be noticed that the period 
1850-1903 was marked by a steady increase of the cash wages of 
the farm labourer, as indicated in the following table from the Report 
on the Earnings of Agricultural Labourers issued by the Board of 
Trade in 1905. 

Average Weekly Cash Wages of ordinary Agricultural Labourers 
employed on certain Farms in England and Wales. 





England and Wales, 


Eastern counties, 


Year. 


69 farms. 


12 farms. 




s. d. 


s. d. 


1850 


9 3i 


8 8 


1855 


10 11J 


11 5 


i860 


10 11 


10 8 


1865 


11 3, 


10 5, 


1870 


11 io| 


11 ii 


1875 


13 7 


12 iij 


1880 


13 2} 


12 1 


1885 


13 1 


11 5 , 


1890 


13 o| 


11 o\ 


1895 


13 2j 


11 


1900 


14 5* 


13 ii 


1903 


14 7 


13 2! 



(See also Allotments and Small Holdings.) 
Agricultural Education. 

In Great Britain agricultural education as a whole lacks the 
scope and co-ordination which it has in some continental 
countries. Centres at which higher agricultural education is 
given are, however, numerous. The chief are: — 
The Royal Agricultural College, Cirencester. 
Aspatria Agricultural College, Carlisle. 
Tamworth Agricultural College. 
♦Agricultural and Horticultural- College, Uckfield, Sussex. 
♦Agricultural and Horticultural College, Holme Chapel, 
Cheshire. 



414 



AGRICULTURE 



[AMERICAN 



♦Midland Agricultural and Dairy College, Kingston, Derby. 

'Harper- Adams Agricultural College, Newport, Salop. 

'Lancashire County School, Harris Institute, Preston. 

♦University College of North Wales, Bangor. 

♦University of Leeds. 

♦Armstrong College, Newcastle-on-Tyne. 

♦Cambridge University. 

♦University College, Reading. 

♦South-Eastern Agricultural College, Wye. 

♦University College of Wales, Aberystwyth. 

♦Agricultural Institute, Ridgmont (Bedfordshire County 
Council) . 

♦Essex County Technical Laboratories, Chelmsford. 

In the year 1904-1905 £10,600 was devoted by the Board of 
Agriculture to agricultural instruction and experiments. Of this 
sum the greater part was divided amongst the institutions 
marked with an asterisk in the above list. The first three named 
are private establishments. The county councils also expend 
sums varying at their own discretion on instruction in dairy-work, 
poultry-keeping, farriery and veterinary science, horticulture, 
agricultural experiments, agricultural lectures at various centres, 
scholarships at, and grants to, agricultural colleges and schools; 
the whole amount in 1904-1905 reaching £87,472.! The sum 
spent by individual counties varies considerably. In 1904-1905 
Lancashire (£8510), Kent (£5922) and Cheshire (£4310) spent 
most in this "direction. In some instances colleges are supported 
entirely by one county, as is the Holmes Chapel College, Cheshire; 
in others a college is supported by several affiliated counties, as in 
the case of the agricultural department of the University College, 
Reading, which acts in connexion with the counties of Berks, 
Oxon, Hants and Buckingham. The organization and supply of 
county agricultural instruction is often carried out through the 
medium of the institution to which the county is affiliated. In 
Scotland higher agricultural instruction is given at: — 

Edinburgh and East of Scotland Agricultural College. 
Edinburgh University, Agriculture Department. 
West of Scotland Agricultural College, Glasgow. 
Aberdeen and North of Scotland Agricultural College. 
University of St. Andrews. 

A typical course at one of the higher colleges lasts for two years 
and includes instruction under the heads of soils and manure, 
crops and pasture, live stock, foods and feeding, dairy work, 
farm and estate management and farm bookkeeping, surveying, 
agricultural buildings and machinery, agricultural chemistry, 
agricultural botany, veterinary science and agricultural ento- 
mology. Experimental farms are attached to the colleges. 

The facilities for intermediate are far inferior to those for higher 
agricultural education. Schools for farmers' sons and daughters, 
and others, answering to the icoles pratiques d' agriculture (see 
France), are few, the principal being the Dauntsey Agricultural 
School, Wiltshire, the Hampshire Farm School, Basing, and the 
Farm School at Newton Rigg, Penrith, Cumberland, maintained 
by the county councils of Cumberland and Westmorland. Occa- 
sionally grammar schools have agricultural sides, and in evening 
continuation schools agricultural classes are sometimes held. 
Both elementary day schools and continuation schools are in 
many cases provided with gardens in which horticultural teaching 
is given. 

In Ireland agricultural education is under the supervision of 
the Department of Agriculture and Technical Instruction for 
Ireland, founded in 1899. Higher education is given at the Royal 
College of Science, Dublin; the Albert Agricultural College, 
Glasnevin; and the Munster Institute, Cork, for female students, 
where dairying and poultry-keeping are prominent subjects. 
Winter classes for boys over sixteen years of age are held at 
centres in some counties, and there are winter schools of agri- 
culture at Downpatrick, Monaghan and Mount Bellew (Co. 
Galway); while lectures are given at farmers' meetings by 

1 This sum was furnished out of a total of £693,851, forming the 
residue grant allocated for the purposes of education to the various 
county councils of England and Wales under the Local Taxation 
(customs and Excise) Act 1 890. 



itinerant instructors. The Department carries on agricultural 
experiment-stations at Athenry (Co. Galway), Ballyhaise (Co. 
Cavan) and Clonakilty (Co. Cork), where farm apprentices are 
received and instructed. 

Agriculture in the United States 

Agriculture has been the chief and most characteristic work 
of the American people, that in which they have achieved the 
greatest results in proportion to the resources at command, 
that in which their economic superiority has been most strikingly 
manifest. In ten years from 1790, the mean population of the 
period being 4,500,000, 65,000 sq. m. were for the first time 
brought within the limits of settlement, crossed with roads and 
bridges, covered with dwellings, both public and private, much 
of it also cleared of primeval forest; and this in addition to 
keeping up and improving the whole extent of previous settle- 
ments, and building towns and cities, at a score of favoured 
points. In the next decade, the mean number of inhabitants' 
being about 6,500,000, population extended itself over 98,000 
sq. m. of absolutely new territory, an area eight times as large as 
Holland. Between 1810 and 1820, besides increasing the density 
of population on almost every league of the older territory, 
besides increasing their manufacturing capital twofold, in spite 
of a three years' war, the people of the United States advanced 
their frontier to occupy 101,000 sq. m., the mean population 
being 8,250,000. Between 1820 and 1830, 124,000 sq. m. were 
brought within the frontier and made the seat of habitation 
and cultivation; between 1830 and 1840, 175,000 sq. m.; 
between 1840 and 1850, 215,000 sq. m. The Civil War, indeed, 
checked the westward flow of population, though it caused no 
refluence, but after 1870 great progress was made in the creation 
of new farms and the development of old. 

That which has allowed this great work to be done so rapidly 
and fortunately has been, first, the popular tenure Of the soil, 
and, secondly, the character of the agricultural class. At no 
time have the cultivators of the soil north of the Potomac and 
Ohio constituted a peasantry in the ordinary sense of that term. 
They have been the same kind of men, out of precisely the same 
homes, generally with the same early training, as those who 
filled the learned professions or who were engaged in manu- 
facturing or commercial pursuits. Switzerland and Scotland 
have, in a degree, approached the United States in this particular; 
but there is no other considerable country where as much mental 
activity and alertness has been applied to the cultivation of the 
soil as to trade and manufactures. 

But even the causes which have been adduced would have 
failed to produce such effects but for the exceptional inventive 
ingenuity of the American. The mechanical genius which has 
entered into manufacturing in the United States, the engineering 
skill which has guided the construction of the greatest works 
of the continent, have been far exceeded in the hurried " im- 
provements " of the pioneer farm; in the housing of women, 
children and live stock and gathered crops against the storms 
of the first few winters; in the rough-and-ready reconnaissances 
which determined the " lay of the land " and the capabilities 
of the soil; in the preparation for the thousand exigencies of 
primitive agriculture. It is no exaggeration to say that the 
chief manufacture of the United States, prior to 1900, was the 
manufacture of 5,740,000 farms, comprising 841,200,000 acres. 

The people of the United States, finding themselves on a 
continent containing an almost limitless extent of land of fair 
average fertility, having at the start but little accumulated 
capital and urgent occasions for the economy of labour, have 
elected to regard the land in the earliest stages of occupation 
as practically of no value, and to regard labour as of high value. 
In pursuance of this view they have freely sacrificed the land, 
so far as was necessary, in order to save labour, systematically 
cropping the fields on the principle of obtaining the largest 
results with the least expenditure, limiting improvements ; to 
what was demanded for immediate uses, and caring little about 
returning to the soil an equivalent for the properties taken from 
it in the harvests of successive years. But, so far as the northern 



AMERICAN] 



AGRICULTURE 



4i5 



states are concerned, the enormous profits of this alleged wasteful 
cultivation have in the main been applied, not to personal con- 
sumption, but to permanent improvements, — not indeed to 
improvements of the land, but to what were still more needed 
in the situation, namely, improvements upon the land. The 
first-fruits of a virgin soil have been expended in forms which 
have vastly enhanced the productive power of the country. 
The land, doubtless, as one factor of that productive power, 
became temporarily less efficient than it would have been under 
a conservative European treatment; but the joint product of 
the three factors — land, labour and capital — was for the time 
enormously increased. Under this regimen the fertility of the 
land, of course, in time necessarily declined, sooner or later, 
according to the nature of the crops grown and to the degree 
of original strength in the soil. Resort was then had to new 
fields farther west. The granary of the continent moved first 
to western New York, thence into the Ohio valley, and then, 
again, to the banks of the Mississippi. The north and south line 
dividing the wheat product of the United States into two equal 
parts was in 1850 drawn along the 82nd meridian (8i° 58' 49"). 
In i860 that line was drawa along the 86th (86° 1' 38"), in 1870 
along the 89th (88° 48' 40"), in 1880 along the 90th (00° 30' 46'), 
in 1890 along the 93rd (93° 9' 18"), and in 1900'along the 95th 
(94 59' 23"). Meanwhile one portion of the inhabitants of the 
earlier settlements joined in the movement across the face of 
the continent. As the grain centre passed on to the west they 
followed it, too restless by character and habit to find pleasure 
in the work of stable communities. A second portion of the 
inhabitants became engaged in raising, upon limited areas, 
small crops, garden vegetables and orchard fruits, and in pro- 
ducing butter, milk, poultry and eggs, for the supply of the 
cities and manufacturing towns which had been built up out of 
the abundant profits of the primitive agriculture. Still another 
portion of the agricultural population gradually became occupied 
in the more careful and intense culture of the cereal crops upon 
the better lands, the less eligible fields being allowed to spring 
up in brush and wood. Deep ploughing and thorough drainage 
were resorted to; fertilizers were employed to bring up and to 
keep up the soil; and thus began the serious systematic agricul- 
ture of the older states. Something continued to be done in 
wheat, but not much. New York raised 13 million bushels 
in 1850; thirty years later she raised 115 million bushels; and 
fifty years later 105 million bushels. Pennsylvania raised 153 
million bushels in 1850; in 1880 she raised 192 million bushels; 
and in 1900 20J million bushels. More is done in Indian corn 
(maize), that most prolific cereal, the backbone of American 
agriculture; still more is done relatively in buckwheat, barley 
and rye. Pennsylvania, though the eleventh state in wheat 
production in 1905, stood first in rye and second in buckwheat 
(ninth in oats). New York was only twenty-first in wheat, 
but first in buckwheat (tenth in barley), fourth in rye. We do 
not, however, reach the full significance of the situation until 
we account for the fourth portion of the former agricultural 
population, in noting how naturally and fortunately commercial 
and manufacturing cities spring up in the sites which have been 
prepared for them by the lavish expenditure of the enormous 
profits of a primitive agriculture upon permanently useful im- 
provements of a constructive character. These towns are the 
gifts of agriculture. 

Besides the extension of cultivated area, very little was 
accomplished in the way of agricultural improvement before 
1850. With some few exceptions the methods of cultivation 
were substantially the same as those of colonial days, and were 
marked by crudeness, waste and a general adherence to rule-of- 
thumb principles. The year 1850 roughly marks the beginning 
of a period of improvement and development. The Irish famine 
of 1846 and the German political troubles of 1848 were followed 
by an unprecedented emigration to America of highly desirable 
European labourers, for whom there were cheap and abundant 
lands. The period from 1850 to 1870 was marked by a steady 
growth, which, in the western states, was highly stimulated by 
the Civil War. While this conflict withdrew a certain amount 



of productive energy from agricultural pursuits, it tended at the 
same time to increase the value of farm labour and of farm 
products and to extend the use of machinery in order to offset 
the deficient labour supply. Agricultural machinery had been 
employed before the war, but only to a very small extent. In 
1864, 70,000 reapers and mowers were manufactured, twice as 
many as in 1862, and manufacturers were unable to supply the 
demand. Moreover, in the years i860, 1861 and 1862 the wheat 
crops of Great Britain and the European continent were failures, 
while those of the United States, far removed from the theatre 
of military operations, were unusually large. The wheat exports 
to Great Britain in 1861 were three times as great as those of 
any previous year, and the strong demand from abroad was an 
additional stimulus to higher prices. In 1864 agricultural prices 
were from 100 to 200 % higher than in 186 1, while transportation 
charges had only slightly advanced and in some instances had 
actually decreased. In the middle of the war the farmers' profits 
were normal; toward the end they had increased enormously. 
This marvellous agricultural prosperity of a nation engaged in 
one of the world's most formidable wars has no counterpart in 
modern history. In the decade from i860 to 1870 there was a 
steady increase in cultivated area, in agricultural products and 
in population. The value of the farm lands in the northern 
states in 1870 exceeded that of i860 by five dollars an acre. On 
the other hand, the farm lands of the southern states had declined 
in value to an almost equal amount; but after 1870 these states 
also made substantial progress, and in 1880 they produced more 
cotton than in i860, when the greatest crop under the slave 
system was grown. 

Since 1870 the most important factors in this development 
have been the employment of more scientific methods of pro- 
duction and the more extensive use of machinery. The study 
of soils with a view of adapting to them the most suitable crops 
and fertilizers; the increased attention given to diversified 
farming and crop rotation; the introduction and successful 
growth of new plants (e.g. the date palm in Arizona and Cali- 
fornia, and tea in South Carolina); tile drainage; the ensilage 
of forage; more careful selection in breeding; the use of 
inoculation to prevent Texas fever in cattle and cholera in 
swine, of tuberculin to discover the presence of tuberculosis in 
cows, of organic ferments to hasten the progress of butter-making, 
of the " Babcock test " for ascertaining the amount of fat in 
milk, of fungicides and insecticides to destroy fruit and vegetable 
pests, — such are but a few manifestations of the spread of scien- 
tific knowledge among the farming population of the United 
States. Nearly every county has some sort of agricultural 
society; in 1899 there were about 1500 of these organizations, 
some of which, especially those holding annual fairs, received 
state aid. 

With the improvement in technical processes of production 
came the conquest of the arid regions of the western states. 
Irrigation was first employed in the west by the Mormons in 
1847; but as late as 1870 only about 20,000 acres had been 
irrigated. In 1880 the irrigated area was approximately 
1,000,000 acres, and in the decade from 1889 to 1899 it increased 
from 3,631,381 to 7,539,545 acres, a gain of 107-6 %. By 
1902 there had been a still further increase to 9,478,852 acres, 
a gain of 2 5 • 7 % in three years. As many of the streams available 
for irrigation purposes lie within more than one state, the control 
of water supply is a proper matter for federal jurisdiction, and 
in June 1902 Congress provided for an extensive system of 
irrigation works in thirteen states and three territories. The 
cost of the work is defrayed from the proceeds of the sales of 
government lands within the states and territories affected 
by the act. The measure is not paternalistic; the settlers on 
the lands, which are divided into farms of not less than 40 nor 
more than 160 acres, are required to make annual payments 
to the government in proportion to the water service they have 
received, until the original cost of the works has been met. The 
first of these works, the so-called Truckee- Carson project, of 
Nevada, was completed in June 1905, and at the end of that 
year eight projects, in as many different states, were under 



4-i6 



AGRICULTURE 



[AMERICAN 



construction; bids had been received for three more, and the 
seven others had received the approval of the secretary of the 
interior. With these initial undertakings it was estimated that 
i ,000,859 acres could be reclaimed. In addition to supplying the 
soils with water, means have been found of ridding them of their 
alkali, or of rendering it harmless; and this is an element of 
reclamation hardly less important than irrigation itself. A third 
step in the reclamation of desert lands is arid farming — that is, 
the adapting to the soils of crops that require a minimum amount 
of moisture, and the utilization, to the fullest possible extent, 
of the meagre amount of rainfall in the region. Experiments 
conducted in this direction in Utah produced promising results. 

The development of farming machinery has kept pace with 
the general progress in scientific agriculture. Although numer- 
ous patents were issued for such machinery before 1850, its use, 
with the exception of the cotton gin, was very restricted before 
that date. Even iron ploughs were not in general use until 
1842, and a really scientific plough was practically unknown 
before 1870. Thirty years later the large farms of the Pacific 
states were ploughed, harrowed and sowed with wheat in a 
single operation by fifty-horse-power traction engines drawing 
ploughs, harrows and press drills. Since 1850 there has been 
a transition from the sickle and the scythe to a machine that in 
one operation mows, threshes, cleans and sacks the wheat, 
and in five minutes after touching the standing grain has it 
ready for the market. Hay-stackers, potato planters and diggers, 
feed choopers and grinders, manure-spreaders, check-row corn 
planters and ditch-digging machines are some of the common 
labour-saving devices. By the 28th of August 1907 the United 
States Patent Office had issued patents for 13,212 harvesting 
machines, 6352 threshers, 6680 harrows and diggers, 9649 
seeders and planters, and 13,171 ploughs. In the manufacture 
of agricultural machinery the United States leads the world. 
The total value of the implements and machinery used by 
farmers of the United States in 1880 was $406,520,055; in 1890 
$494,247,467; in 1900 $761,261,550, a gain in this last decade 
*}f 54%- The total value of the implements and machinery 
manufactured in 1850 was $6,842,611; in 1880 $68,640,486; 
in 1890 $81,271,651; in 1900 $101,207,428. These figures, 
however, are a very poor indication of the actual use of 
machinery, on account of the rapid decrease in prices following 
its manufacture on a more extensive scale and by improved 
methods. 

The effects of the new agriculture are apparent from the 
following figures: By the methods of 1830 it required 64 hours 
and 15 minutes of man-labour and cost $3-71 to produce an acre 
of wheat; by the methods employed in 1896 it required 2 hours 
and 58 minutes of man-labour and cost 72 cents. To produce 
an acre of barley in 1830 required 63 hours of man-labour and 
cost $3-59; in 1896 it required 2 hours and 43 minutes and cost 
60 cents. An acre of oats produced by the methods of 1830 
required 66 hours and 15 minutes of man-labour and cost $3-73; 
the methods of 1893 required only 7 hours and 6 minutes and 
cost $107. With the same unit of labour the average quantity 
of all leading crops produced by modern methods is about five 
times as great as that produced by the methods employed 
in 1850, and the cost of production is reduced by one half. 
From 1 880 to 1900 the average number of acres of leading crops 
per male worker increased from 23-3 to 31-0, or 34%; the 
number of horses per worker from 1-7 to 2-3, or 35%; and the 
value of agricultural product per person employed from $286-82 
to $454-37, or 58-4%. 

There are numerous other factors that have operated to the 
benefit of the agriculturist. Increased transportation facilities 
and lower freight charges have widened his market. The pro- 
cesses of canning, packing, preserving and refrigerating have 
produced a similar effect, and have also provided a means for 
the disposal of surplus perishable products that otherwise would 
be lost. The utilization of by-products, as, for example, the 
conversion of cotton seed into oil, fertilizers and food for live 
stock, has become another source of profit. 

Great economic and social changes have resulted from this 



progress. There has been a great division of labour in agri- 
culture. Makers of agricultural implements, of butter and 
cheese, cotton ginners, grist and wheat millers, are now classed 
in the United States census reports as manufacturers, but all 
their work was once done on the farm. The farmer is now more 
of a specialist and more dependent on other industries than 
formerly. He has changed from a producer for home con- 
sumption or a local market to a producer for a world market. 
Unfortunately, his knowledge of economic laws has lagged 
behind his progress in scientific agriculture. The farming class 
at times have experienced periods of great depression, largely 
on account of their inability to adjust their crops to changing 
conditions in the world's markets, and in such cases have been 
prone to seek a remedy in radical legislation. Periods of agri- 
cultural discontent at different times have been marked by the 
political activity of the " Grangers " and of the " Farmers' 
Alliance," and even by the formation of new political parties 
such as the Greenback party in 1874 and the Populist or People's 
party in 1892 — whose strength lay mainly in the agricultural 
states. The new industrial conditions that produced com- 
binations among manufacturers were much slower in their effect 
upon the farming element, but gradually led to increasing 
co-operation and to the organization of the growers of various 
commodities for marketing their crops. The fruit growers of 
California and the tobacco growers of Kentucky have furnished 
interesting examples of such organizations. Under the improved 
conditions there is less drudgery on the farm; the farmer does 
more work, produces more, and yet has more leisure than 
formerly. Better roads, rural free mail delivery, telephone and 
electric lines are removing the isolation of country life, and to 
some extent are diminishing the attractions of the cities for thf 
rural population. 

Covering as it does the breadth of the North American con- 
tinent, with 3,000,000 sq. m. of land surface, not including 
Alaska and the islands, of which over 800,000,000 acres are in 
farms and over 400,000,000 in actual cultivation, representing 
every variety of soil and all the climatic life zones of the world, 
except the extreme boreal and the hottest tropical, the United 
States affords an important subject of study in respect of agri- 
culture. Its cotton, wheat and meat are large factors in all 
markets, and its many other agricultural products are distributed 
throughout the civilized world. To the student the equipment 
and methods of agriculture in the United States form as interest- 
ing a subject of examination as do its resources and production. 
In quantity, distribution and inter-relation of heat and moisture 
— the chief factors in agricultural production — the United States 
is greatly blessed. We find in this vast territory all the agricul- 
tural belts mapped by the biologist, producing all varieties of 
cereals, fruits and breeds of live stock, whilst all kinds of soils, 
adapted to different crops, are spread out at all altitudes from 
1 8000 ft. down to sea-level. 

The story of the vast and varied agriculture of the United 
States can be outlined by extracts from the figures published by 
the Census, the Agricultural and other government departments. 

As a result of the great supply of available land the number of 
farms in the United States increased between 1 850 and 
1900 from 1,449,073 to 5.739.657; their total acreage p 
increased from 293,560,614 to 841,201,546 acres; their 
improved acreage increased from 113,032,614 to 414,793,191 acres; 
and their unimproved 1 acreage from 180,528,000 to 426,408,355 
acres. Table XXVII. exhibits the increases of number of farms, 
total and improved acreage by decades. 

The largest percentage of increase of improved land was 50-7, 
from 1870 to 1880; the lowest was in the decade i860 to 1870, the 
period of the Civil War, and was 15-8. The chief cause of this 
wonderful development of agriculture is the large area of cheap 
public lands which has been available for immigrants and natives 
alike. Up to 1906, under the Homestead Act of the 20th of May 
1862, the number of entries, both final and pending, covered 
185,385,000 acres. Between 1875 and 1905 the public and Indian 
lands sold for cash and under homestead and timber culture laws, as 
well as those allotted by scrip, granted to the colleges of agriculture 

1 " Unimproved " land includes land which has never been 
ploughed, mown or cropped, and also land once cultivated but now 
overgrown with trees or shrubs. 



AMERICAN] 



AGRICULTURE 



4*7 



and mechanic arts and other institutions, and by military bounty 
land warrants, and selected by states and railroad corporations, 
covered about 430,000,000 acres. In addition to this, the states 
and railroad corporations sold a large amount of land to farmers 
of which we have no accurate record. This vast territory, greater 



Table XXVII- 



-Percentage of Increase of Number and Acreage of 
Farms by Census Decades. 



The United States. 


Number of 
Farms. 


Acreage. 


Total. 


Improved. 


1850 to i860 
i860 ,, 1870 
1870 „ 1880 
1880 „ 1890 
1890 ,, 1900 


41-1 
30-1 
50-7 
13-9 

25-7 


38-7 

0-1 

3i-5 

16-2 

35-0 


44-3 
15-8 
5°-7 
25-6 
i6-o 


1850 to 1900 


296-0 


186-5 


267-1 



Year. 



Number of 
Farms. 



1880 
1890 
1900 



4,008,907 
4,564,641 
5.737,372 



in extent than Germany and France combined, was added to 
the farms of the country in thirty years. In many cases railroad 
building has made the settlement of the public lands possible for 
the first time, and the building of branch lines, by providing means 
for transporting products to market, has greatly facilitated the 
acquisition of other lands. The mileage of railways 
increased 310-7 % between 1870 and 1905. The in- 
teresting fact is that this increase corresponds 
geographically to the increase in farms. 

The agricultural statistics do not include any farm 
of less than three acres unless it produced at least 
$500 worth of prqducts in the preceding year. The 
census of 1900 showed that the average size of farms 
was 146 acres, or nine acres more than in 1890 and 
57 acres less than in 1850. This fact, however, does 
not indicate a general tendency toward the con- 
solidation of holdings. The increase in the average size of farms 
in the whole country is due to the extension of grazing lands in 
the Rocky Mountain region and in Texas, and to the enlarge- 
ment of the wheat fields in the Mississippi valley. On the other 
hand, in the southern states there has been a steady breaking up of 
holdings and decrease in the average size of farms since the close 
of the Civil War. In the New England states, where dairying has 
become the leading agricultural industry, there was an increase of 
2-2 acres in the size of farms during the decade 1890-1900. This 
increase was more than offset by the decrease in the Atlantic states 
from New York to Maryland inclusive (2-8 acres), where there has 
been a subdivision of farms following the increased attention given 
to the growing of fruits and vegetables for cities. The same tendency 
is noted in the states of Ohio, Indiana and Illinois. As will be seen 
from Table XXVIII., the average farm, which steadily diminished 
in size from 1850 to 1880, increased between 1880 and 1900. 

Table XXVIII. — Average Acreage of Farms and Proportion of 
Improved Land therein. 



Statisticians usually put it at 40 %, and this is probably more nearly 
correct (Table XXX.). 

The wages paid farm labourers, as ascertained by the Department 
of Agriculture, are rather low compared with the average wages of 
labour, but not lower than the wages of other unskilled labour. The 
average monthly wage of the agricultural labourer, without board, 
was #19-50 in 1870, $16-42 in 1880, $18-33 in l8 90, $17-70 in 1895, 
and $20-23 m 1899, when the maximum for any state was $45-10 
in Nevada, the minimum $10-06 in South Carolina. The wages of 
the American farm labourer were at this last date named (1899) 
higher than for any other farm labourer save in Canada and the 
British colonies of Australasia; though lower than wages paid in 
American cities, they have greater purchasing power. J. R. Dodge, 
in " Farm Labour in the United States " (vol. xi., Report of Industrial 
Commission on Agriculture, &c, 1901), says: " In addition to wages 
the married labourer has a house free of rent, a garden, firewood, 
pasturage and other perquisites. The enterprising labourer usually 
becomes a tenant and afterwards a farm-owner." 

The figures for farm capital and the value of agricultural products 
are so vast that it is extremely difficult to put them in an intelligible 
form. The farm capital of the United States reported by yatue ot 
the census of 1900 reached $20,514,002,000, a sum more f arms ant / 
than four times the capital invested in manufactures, products. 
the main classes being, in round numbers :— Land, 
fences and buildings, $16,674,690,000; machines and implements. 

Table XXIX. — Number of Farms of Specified Tenure. 



Number of farms operated by 



Owners. 1 



2,984,306 
3,269,728 
3,712,408 



Cash 
Tenants. 



322,357 
454.659 
751,665 



Share 
Tenants.' 



702,244 

840,254 

1.273,299 



Percentage of farms operated by 



Owners. 



74-5 
71-6 
64-7 



Cash 
Tenants. 



8-0 

IO-O 

131 



Share 
Tenants. 



17-5 
18-4 

22-2 





Whole Farm. 


Proportion of 
Improved Land. 


1850 
i860 
1870 
1880 
1890 
1900 


202-6 

199-2 
153-3 
133-7 
I36-5 
1466 


38-5 
40-1 

46-3 
53-i 
57-4 
49-3 



The acreage of North Atlantic farms decreased from 112-6 in 1850 
to 95-3 in 1890, and increased in 1890-1900 to 96-5 acres. In the 
South Atlantic states the average was 376-4 acres in 1850, and there 
has been steady decrease, so that in 1900 it was 108-4, or one-third 
less than the average for the entire country. In the north central 
states the averages of 1850 and 1900 were nearly the same (143-3 
and 144-5 respectively), with the minimum (121-9 acres) in 1880. 
The south central states averaged 291 acres in 1850, 321-3 in i860, 
144 in 1890, and 155-4 m 1900. The maximum decade for the 
western states was that ending in 1850 (694-9 acres), and the mini- 
mum 1880 (312-9); and the average in 1900 was 386-1 acres. 

Table XXlX. gives the number of farms, together with their 
distribution, under different forms of tenure in the years 1880, 1890 
and 1900. 

The steady drift towards farm tenancy of late is believed to be 

injurious to production; but it is impossible to prove this, so great 

has been the aggregate increase in products. 

The number of persons engaged in agriculture as a business in 

1900 was 10,381,765, or 36 % of all persons in gainful 

occupations. It is interesting to note that 977,336 of these 

were women. This is an increase of 2,667,890 persons over 

1880. Thus, if the farm family is the same size as that of 

the remainder of the population — it is probably slightly 

larger — the agricultural population would be 36 % of the whole. 

I- 14 



Agri- 
cultural 
occupa- 
tions. 



$761,262,000; live stock $3,078,050,000. The products of the 
farms in the census year 1899 were valued at $4,739,119,000. 
Between 1850 and 1900 the aggregate farm capital increased 416 %. 
The greatest increase of farm capital was between 1850 and i860, 
101 %; the next was the decade 1880-1890, when the increase was 
32 %. Between 1890 and 1900 the increase was 28%. 

Table XXX. — Number of Persons of Ten Years of Age and over in 
the different Agricultural Pursuits in 1900. 



Occupation. 


Total Persons. 


Dairymen and women ..... 
Farmers and farm superintendents . 

Gardeners, nurserymen and viticulturists 
Lumbermen and raftsmen .... 
Stock-raisers, herders, &c. .... 
Turpentine-farmers and labourers . 

Total 


10,875 

5,674.875 

4,410,877 

61,788 

72,020 

84,988 

24.737 

36,075 

5.530 


10,381,765 



The growth of farm area and of capital invested in agriculture was 
followed by a proportionate increase in the chief crops (TableXXXI.) . 

The distinguishing feature of the period 1 870-1 880 was the rate 
of increase of barley, Indian corn, wheat and oats. Since 1870 the 
production of nearly all of the farm crops increased more rapidly 
than the population, the most absolute proof of the substantial 
prosperity of the people. The increase in population for the fifty 
years from 1840 to 1890 was 267 %; from 1870 to 1880, 30 %; from 
1880 to 1890, 25 %; from 1890 to 1900, 21 %; but the food and 
other supplies far exceeded the demands of even this great population. 

Table XXXI. — Production of certain Farm Crops from 1870 to 1905 
— Millions of Bushels. 





Indian Corn. 


Wheat. 


Oats. 


Barley. 


1870 


1094 


235 


247 


26 


1880 


1717 


498 


418 


45 


1890 


1489 


399 


523 


67 


1900 


2105 


522 


809 


58 


1905 


2707 


693 


953 


136 



Table XXXII. gives important facts with regard to the cereal 
production of the United States between 1870 and 1905. 

The average farm price of wheat declined, as is shown in that 
table, from $1-05 per bushel for the decade 1870-1880 to 65-3 
cents for the period 1 890-1 899. The farm prices of the other 

1 Includes farms operated by owners, part-owners, owners and 
tenants, and managers. 

2 Tenants of farms rented for a share of the products. 

II 



4l8 



AGRICULTURE 



[AMERICAN 



cereals declined less during the thirty years. Corn declined from 
an average farm price of 42-6 cents per bushel for 1870-1880 to 
34-4 cents in 1890-1899. The average production per acre shows 
nothing conclusive with regard to the fertility of the soil of the 
country. The expansion of the crop area usually causes a lowering 
of the average yield per acre by distributing the culture, fertilizers, 
&c, over more surface. Likewise the contraction of crop area will 
usually increase the average yield per acre of the entire country. 

Table XXXII. — Average Yield and Value of Cereal Crops in the United States, by Periods 

of Years, 1 870-1905. 



Period. 


Indian Corn. 


Wheat. 


Oats. 


Average 


Average 


Average 


Average 


Average 


Average 




Farm Price 


Yield per 


Farm Price 


Yield per 


Farm Price 


Yield per 




per Bushel. 


Acre. 


per Bushel. 


Acre. 


per Bushel. 


Acre. 




Dollars. 


Bushels. 


Dollars. 


Bushels. 


Dollars. 


Bushels. 


1870 to 1880 . . 


0-426 


27-1 


1-05 


