





The 
Theory 


of Relativity 











The Theory of Relativity and Other Essays 


Albert Einstein 


oren Y roan 


INTEGRATED MEDIA 


NEW YORK 


Contents 
1. The Theory_of Relativity (1949) 


2. E= MC? (1946) 
General Consideration Concerning the Method of Science 


Mechanics and the Attempt to Base all Physics Upon It 








The Field Concept 
The Theory_of Relativity 
Quantum Theory and the Fundamentals of Physics 


Relative Theory and Corpuscles 





Summary 
4. The Fundamentals of Theoretical Physics (1940) 
5. The Common Language of Science (1941) 
6. The Laws of Science and the Laws of Ethics (1950) 


7. An Elementary Derivation of the Equivalence of Mass and Energy 
(1946) 


A Biography of Albert Einstein 





Acknowledgments 


1. The Theory of Relativity 


MATHEMATICS DEALS EXCLUSIVELY with the relations of concepts to each other 
without consideration of their relation to experience. Physics too deals with 
mathematical concepts; however, these concepts attain physical content only 
by the clear determination of their relation to the objects of experience. This 
in particular is the case for the concepts of motion, space, time. 

The theory of relativity is that physical theory which is based on a 
consistent physical interpretation of these three concepts. The name “theory 
of relativity” is connected with the fact that motion from the point of view of 
possible experience always appears as the relative motion of one object with 
respect to another (e.g., of a car with respect to the ground, or the earth with 
respect to the sun and the fixed stars). Motion is never observable as “motion 
with respect to space” or, as it has been expressed, as “absolute motion.” The 
“principle of relativity” in its widest sense is contained in the statement: The 
totality of physical phenomena is of such a character that it gives no basis for 
the introduction of the concept of “absolute motion”; or shorter but less 
precise: There is no absolute motion. 

It might seem that our insight would gain little from such a negative 
statement. In reality, however, it is a strong restriction for the (conceivable) 
laws of nature. In this sense there exists an analogy between the theory of 
relativity and thermodynamics. The latter too is based on a negative 
statement: “There exists no perpetuum mobile.” 

The development of the theory of relativity proceeded in two steps, 
“special theory of relativity” and “general theory of relativity.” The latter 
presumes the validity of the former as a limiting case and is its consistent 
continuation. 


A. Special theory of relativity. 
Physical interpretation of space and time in classical mechanics. 


Geometry, from a physical standpoint, is the totality of laws according to 
which rigid bodies mutually at rest can be placed with respect to each other 


(e.g., a triangle consists of three rods whose ends touch permanently). It is 
assumed that with such an interpretation the Euclidean laws are valid. 
“Space” in this interpretation is in principle an infinite rigid body (or 
skeleton) to which the position of all other bodies is related (body of 
reference). Analytic geometry (Descartes) uses as the body of reference, 
which represents space, three mutually perpendicular rigid rods on which the 
“coordinates” (x, y, Z) of space points are measured in the known manner as 
perpendicular projections (with the aid of a rigid unit-measure). 

Physics deals with “events” in space and time. To each event belongs, 
besides its place coordinates x, y, z, a time value t. The latter was considered 
measurable by a clock (ideal periodic process) of negligible spatial extent. 
This clock C is to be considered at rest at one point of the coordinate system, 
e.g., at the coordinate origin (x = y = z = O). The time of an event taking 
place at a point P (x, y, z) is then defined as the time shown on the clock C 
simultaneously with the event. Here the concept “simultaneous” was assumed 
as physically meaningful without special definition. This is a lack of exactness 
which seems harmless only since with the help of light (whose velocity is 
practically infinite from the point of view of daily experience) the 
simultaneity of spatially distant events can apparently be decided 
immediately. 

The special theory of relativity removes this lack of precision by defining 
simultaneity physically with the use of light signals. The time t of the event in 
P is the reading of the clock C at the time of arrival of a light signal emitted 
from the event, corrected with respect to the time needed for the light signal 
to travel the distance. This correction presumes (postulates) that the velocity 
of light is constant. 

This definition reduces the concept of simultaneity of spatially distant 
events to that of the simultaneity of events happening at the same place 
(coincidence), namely the arrival of the light signal at C and the reading of C. 

Classical mechanics is based on Galileo’s principle: A body is in rectilinear 
and uniform motion as long as other bodies do not act on it. This statement 
cannot be valid for arbitrary moving systems of coordinates. It can claim 
validity only for so-called “inertial systems.” Inertial systems are in rectilinear 
and uniform motion with respect to each other. In classical physics laws claim 
validity only with respect to all inertial systems (special principle of 
relativity). 


It is now easy to understand the dilemma which has led to the special 
theory of relativity. Experience and theory have gradually led to the 
conviction that light in empty space always travels with the same velocity c 
independent of its color and the state of motion of the source of light 
(principle of the constancy of the velocity of light—in the following referred 
to as “L-principle”). Now elementary intuitive considerations seem to show 
that the same light ray cannot move with respect to all inertial systems with 
the same velocity c. The L-principle seems to contradict the special principle 
of relativity. 

It turns out, however, that this contradiction is only an apparent one which 
is based essentially on the prejudice about the absolute character of time or 
rather of the simultaneity of distant events. We just saw that x, y, z and t of 
an event can, for the moment, be defined only with respect to a certain chosen 
system of coordinates (inertial system). The transformation of the x, y, z, t of 
events which has to be carried out with the passage from one inertial system 
to another (coordinate transformation), is a problem which cannot be solved 
without special physical assumptions. However, the following postulate is 
exactly sufficient for a solution: The L-principle holds for all inertial systems 
(application of the special principle of relativity to the L-principle). The 
transformations thus defined, which are linear in x, y, z, t, are called Lorentz 
transformations. Lorentz transformations are formally characterized by the 
demand that the expression 


dx? + dy? + dz? — c*dt?, 


which is formed from the coordinate differences dx, dy, dz, dt of two 
infinitely close events, be invariant (i.e., that through the transformation it 
goes over into the same expression formed from the coordinate differences in 
the new system). 

With the help of the Lorentz transformations the special principle of 
relativity can be expressed thus: The laws of nature are invariant with respect 
to Lorentz-transformations (i.e., a law of nature does not change its form if 
one introduces into it a new inertial system with the help of a Lorentz- 
transformation on x, y, Z, t). 


The special theory of relativity has led to a clear understanding of the 
physical concepts of space and time and in connection with this to a 
recognition of the behavior of moving measuring rods and clocks. It has in 
principle removed the concept of absolute simultaneity and thereby also that 
of instantaneous action at a distance in the sense of Newton. It has shown 
how the law of motion must be modified in dealing with motions that are not 
negligibly small as compared with the velocity of light. It has led to a formal 
clarification of Maxwell’s equations of the electromagnetic field; in particular 
it has led to an understanding of the essential oneness of the electric and the 
magnetic field. It has unified the laws of conservation of momentum and of 
energy into one single law and has demonstrated the equivalence of mass and 
energy. From a formal point of view one may characterize the achievement of 
the special theory of relativity thus: it has shown generally the role which the 
universal constant c (velocity of light) plays in the laws of nature and has 
demonstrated that there exists a close connection between the form in which 
time on the one hand and the spatial coordinates on the other hand enter into 
the laws of nature. 


B. General theory of relativity. 


The special theory of relativity retained the basis of classical mechanics in 
one fundamental point, namely the statement: The laws of nature are valid 
only with respect to mertial systems. The “permissible” transformations for 
the coordinates (i.e., those which leave the form of the laws unchanged) are 
exclusively the (linear) Lorentz-transformations. Is this restriction really 
founded in physical facts? The following argument convincingly denies it. 

Principle of equivalence. A body has an inertial mass (resistance to 
acceleration) and a heavy mass (which determines the weight of the body in a 
given gravitational field, e.g., that at the surface of the earth). These two 
quantities, so different according to their definition, are according to 
experience measured by one and the same number. There must be a deeper 
reason for this. The fact can also be described thus: In a gravitational field 
different masses receive the same acceleration. Finally, it can also be 
expressed thus: Bodies in a gravitational field behave as in the absence of a 
gravitational field if, in the latter case, the system of reference used is a 
uniformly accelerated coordinate system (instead of an inertial system). 


There seems, therefore, to be no reason to ban the following interpretation 
of the latter case. One considers the system as being “at rest” and considers 
the “apparent” gravitational field which exists with respect to it as a “real” 
one. This gravitational field “generated” by the acceleration of the coordinate 
system would of course be of unlimited extent in such a way that it could not 
be caused by gravitational masses in a finite region; however, if we are 
looking for a field-like theory, this fact need not deter us. With this 
interpretation the inertial system loses its meaning and one has an 
“explanation” for the equality of heavy and inertial mass (the same property 
of matter appears as weight or as inertia depending on the mode of 
description). 

Considered formally, the admission of a coordinate system which is 
accelerated with respect to the original “inertial” coordinates means the 
admission of non-linear coordinate transformations, hence a mighty 
enlargement of the idea of invariance, 1.e., the principle of relativity. 

First, a penetrating discussion, using the results of the special theory of 
relativity, shows that with such a generalization the coordinates can no longer 
be interpreted directly as the results of measurements. Only the coordinate 
difference together with the field quantities which describe the gravitational 
field determine measurable distances between events. After one has found 
oneself forced to admit non-linear coordinate transformations as 
transformations between equivalent coordinate systems, the simplest demand 
appears to admit all continuous coordinate transformations (which form a 
group), i.e., to admit arbitrary curvilinear coordinate systems in which the 
fields are described by regular functions (general principle of relativity). 

Now it is not difficult to understand why the general principle of relativity 
(on the basis of the equivalence principle) has led to a theory of gravitation. 
There is a special kind of space whose physical structure (field) we can 
presume as precisely known on the basis of the special theory of relativity. 
This is empty space without electromagnetic field and without matter. It is 
completely determined by its “metric” property: Let dx, dyo, dZp, dto be the 


coordinate differences of two infinitesimally near points (events); then 


(1) ds? = dxo? + dyo? + dzo? = cdig? 


is a measurable quality which is independent of the special choice of the 
inertial system. If one introduces in this space the new coordinates x1, x2, x3 
x4 through a general transformation of coordinates, then the quantity ds2 for 
the same pair of points has an expression of the form 


(2) ds? = Xg..dx'dx* (summed for i and k from 1 to 4) 


where Sig = g,; The gig which form a “symmetric tensor” and are continuous 
functions of x,, ... X4 then describe according to the “principle of 


equivalence” a gravitational field of a special kind (namely one which can be 
retransformed to the form [1]). From Riemann's investigations on metric 
spaces the mathematical properties of this gą field can be given exactly 


(“Riemann-condition”). However, what we are looking for are the equations 
satisfied by “general” gravitational fields. It is natural to assume that they too 
can be described as tensor-fields of the type gig, which in general do not 


admit a transformation to the form (1), i.e., which do not satisfy the 
“Riemann condition,” but weaker conditions, which, just as the Riemann 
condition, are independent of the choice of coordinates (i.e., are generally 
invariant). A simple formal consideration leads to weaker conditions which 
are closely connected with the condition. These conditions are the very 
equations of the pure gravitational field (on the outside of matter and at the 
absence of an electromagnetic field). 

These equations yield Newton’s equations of gravitational mechanics as an 
approximate law and in addition certain small effects which have been 
confirmed by observation (deflection of light by the gravitational field of a 
star, influence of the gravitational potential on the frequency of emitted light, 
slow rotation of the elliptic circuits of planets—perihelion motion of the 
planet Mercury). They further yield an explanation for the expanding motion 
of galactic systems, which is manifested by the red-shift of the light omitted 
from these systems. 

The general theory of relativity is as yet incomplete insofar as it has been 
able to apply the general principle of relativity satisfactorily only to 
gravitational fields, but not to the total field. We do not yet know with 
certainty, by what mathematical mechanism the total field in space is to be 


described and what the general invariant laws are to which this total field is 
subject. One thing, however, seems certain: namely, that the general principle 
of relativity will prove a necessary and effective tool for the solution of the 
problem of the total field. 


2. E = MC? (1946) 


IN ORDER TO UNDERSTAND the law of the equivalence of mass and energy, we 
must go back to two conservation or “balance” principles which, independent 
of each other, held a high place in pre-relativity physics. These were the 
principle of the conservation of energy and the principle of the conservation 
of mass. The first of these, advanced by Leibnitz as long ago as the 
seventeenth century, was developed in the nineteenth century essentially as a 
corollary of a principle of mechanics. 





Drawing from Dr. Einstein’s manuscript. 


Consider, for example, a pendulum whose mass swings back and forth 
between the points A and B. At these points the mass m is higher by the 
amount h than it is at C, the lowest point of the path (see drawing). At C, on 
the other hand, the lifting height has disappeared and instead of it the mass 
has a velocity v. It is as though the lifting height could be converted entirely 
into velocity, and vice versa. The exact relation would be expressed as 
m 
2 
interesting here is that this relation is independent of both the length of the 
pendulum and the form of the path through which the mass moves. 

The significance is that something remains constant throughout the process, 
and that something is energy. At A and at B it is an energy of position, or 
“potential” energy; at C it is an energy of motion, or “kinetic” energy. If this 


mgh = =v', with g representing the acceleration of gravity. What is 


72 
concept is correct, then the sum mgh+ m5 must have the same value for any 


position of the pendulum, if h is understood to represent the height above C, 
and v the velocity at that point in the pendulum's path. And such is found to 
be actually the case. The generalization of this principle gives us the law of 


the conservation of mechanical energy. But what happens when friction stops 
the pendulum? 

The answer to that was found in the study of heat phenomena. This study, 
based on the assumption that heat is an indestructible substance which flows 
from a warmer to a colder object, seemed to give us a principle of the 
“conservation of heat.” On the other hand, from time immemorial it has been 
known that heat could be produced by friction, as in the fire-making drills of 
the Indians. The physicists were for long unable to account for this kind of 
heat “production.” Their difficulties were overcome only when it was 
successfully established that, for any given amount of heat produced by 
friction, an exactly proportional amount of energy had to be expended. Thus 
did we arrive at a principle of the “equivalence of work and heat.” With our 
pendulum, for example, mechanical energy is gradually converted by friction 
into heat. 

In such fashion the principles of the conservation of mechanical and 
thermal energies were merged into one. The physicists were thereupon 
persuaded that the conservation principle could be further extended to take in 
chemical and electromagnetic processes—in short, could be applied to all 
fields. It appeared that in our physical system there was a sum total of 
energies that remained constant through all changes that might occur. 

Now for the principle of the conservation of mass. Mass is defined by the 
resistance that a body opposes to its acceleration (inert mass). It is also 
measured by the weight of the body (heavy mass). That these two radically 
different definitions lead to the same value for the mass of a body is, in itself, 
an astonishing fact. According to the principle—namely, that masses remain 
unchanged under any physical or chemical changes—the mass appeared to be 
the essential (because unvarying) quality of matter. Heating, melting, 
vaporization, or combining into chemical compounds would not change the 
total mass. 

Physicists accepted this principle up to a few decades ago. But it proved 
inadequate in the face of the special theory of relativity. It was therefore 
merged with the energy principle—just as, about 60 years before, the 
principle of the conservation of mechanical energy had been combined with 
the principle of the conservation of heat. We might say that the principle of 
the conservation of energy, having previously swallowed up that of the 


conservation of heat, now proceeded to swallow that of the conservation of 
mass—and holds the field alone. 

It is customary to express the equivalence of mass and energy (though 
somewhat inexactly) by the formula E = mc’, in which c represents the 
velocity of light, about 186,000 miles per second. E is the energy that is 
contained in a stationary body; m is its mass. The energy that belongs to the 
mass m is equal to this mass, multiplied by the square of the enormous speed 
of light—which is to say, a vast amount of energy for every unit of mass. 

But if every gram of material contains this tremendous energy, why did it 
go so long unnoticed? The answer is simple enough: so long as none of the 
energy is given off externally, it cannot be observed. It is as though a man 
who is fabulously rich should never spend or give away a cent; no one could 
tell how rich he was. 

Now we can reverse the relation and say that an increase of E in the 


E. 
amount of energy must be accompanied by an increase of @ in the mass. I 


can easily supply energy to the mass—for instance, if I heat it by 10 degrees. 
So why not measure the mass increase, or weight increase, connected with 
this change? The trouble here is that in the mass increase the enormous factor 
c? occurs in the denominator of the fraction. In such a case the increase is too 
small to be measured directly; even with the most sensitive balance. 

For a mass increase to be measurable, the change of energy per mass unit 
must be enormously large. We know of only one sphere in which such 
amounts of energy per mass unit are released: namely, radioactive 
disintegration. Schematically, the process goes like this: An atom of the mass 
M splits into two atoms of the mass M’ and M”, which separate with 
tremendous kinetic energy. If we imagine these two masses as brought to rest 
—that is, if we take this energy of motion from them—then, considered 
together, they are essentially poorer in energy than was the original atom. 
According to the equivalence principle, the mass sum M’ + M” of the 
disintegration products must also be somewhat smaller than the original mass 
M of the disintegrating atom—in contradiction to the old principle of the 
conservation of mass. The relative difference of the two is on the order of e 
of one percent. 

Now, we cannot actually weigh the atoms individually. However, there are 
indirect methods for measuring their weights exactly. We can likewise 


determine the kinetic energies that are transferred to the disintegration 
products M’ and M”. Thus it has become possible to test and confirm the 
equivalence formula. Also, the law permits us to calculate in advance, from 
precisely determined atom weights, just how much energy will be released 
with any atom disintegration we have in mind. The law says nothing, of 
course, as to whether—or how—the disintegration reaction can be brought 
about. 

What takes place can be illustrated with the help of our rich man. The 
atom M is a rich miser who, during his life, gives away no money (energy). 
But in his will he bequeaths his fortune to his sons M’ and M”, on condition 
that they give to the community a small amount, less than one thousandth of 
the whole estate (energy or mass). The sons together have somewhat less than 
the father had (the mass sum M + M” is somewhat smaller than the mass M of 
the radioactive atom). But the part given to the community, though relatively 
small, is still so enormously large (considered as kinetic energy) that it brings 
with it a great threat of evil. Averting that threat has become the most urgent 
problem of our time. 


3. Physics and Reality 
§ 1. General Consideration Concerning the Method of Science 


IT HAS OFTEN been said, and certainly not without justification, that the man of 
science is a poor philosopher. Why then should it not be the right thing for 
the physicist to let the philosopher do the philosophizing? Such might indeed 
be the right thing at a time when the physicist believes he has at his disposal a 
rigid system of fundamental concepts and fundamental laws which are so well 
established that waves of doubt can not reach them; but, it can not be right at 
a time when the very foundations of physics itself have become problematic 
as they are now. At a time like the present, when experience forces us to seek 
a newer and more solid foundation, the physicist cannot simply surrender to 
the philosopher the critical contemplation of the theoretical foundations; for, 
he himself knows best, and feels more surely where the shoe pinches. In 
looking for a new foundation, he must try to make clear in his own mind just 
how far the concepts which he uses are justified, and are necessities. 

The whole of science is nothing more than a refinement of everyday 
thinking. It is for this reason that the critical thinking of the physicist cannot 
possibly be restricted to the examination of the concepts of his own specific 
field. He cannot proceed without considering critically a much more difficult 
problem, the problem of analyzing the nature of everyday thinking. 

On the stage of our subconscious mind appear in colorful succession sense 
experiences, memory pictures of them, representations and feelings. In 
contrast to psychology, physics treats directly only of sense experiences and 
of the “understanding” of their connection. But even the concept of the “real 
external world” of everyday thinking rests exclusively on sense impressions. 

Now we must first remark that the differentiation between sense 
impressions and representations is not possible; or, at least it is not possible 
with absolute certainty. With the discussion of this problem, which affects 
also the notion of reality, we will not concern ourselves but we shall take the 
existence of sense experiences as given, that is to say as psychic experiences 
of special kind. 


I believe that the first step in the setting of a “real external world” is the 
formation of the concept of bodily objects and of bodily objects of various 
kinds. Out of the multitude of our sense experiences we take, mentally and 
arbitrarily, certain repeatedly occurring complexes of sense impression 
(partly in conjunction with sense impressions which are interpreted as signs 
for sense experiences of others), and we attribute to them a meaning—the 
meaning of the bodily object. Considered logically this concept is not 
identical with the totality of sense impressions referred to; but it is an 
arbitrary creation of the human (or animal) mind. On the other hand, the 
concept owes its meaning and its justification exclusively to the totality of the 
sense impressions which we associate with it. 

The second step is to be found in the fact that, in our thinking (which 
determines our expectation), we attribute to this concept of the bodily object 
a significance, which is to a high degree independent of the sense impression 
which originally gives rise to it. This is what we mean when we attribute to 
the bodily object “a real existence.” The justification of such a setting rests 
exclusively on the fact that, by means of such concepts and mental relations 
between them, we are able to orient ourselves in the labyrinth of sense 
impressions. These notions and relations, although free statements of our 
thoughts, appear to us as stronger and more unalterable than the individual 
sense experience itself, the character of which as anything other than the 
result of an illusion or hallucination is never completely guaranteed. On the 
other hand, these concepts and relations, and indeed the setting of real objects 
and, generally speaking, the existence of “the real world,” have justification 
only in so far as they are connected with sense impressions between which 
they form a mental connection. 

The very fact that the totality of our sense experiences is such that by 
means of thinking (operations with concepts, and the creation and use of 
definite functional relations between them, and the coordination of sense 
experiences to these concepts) it can be put in order, this fact is one which 
leaves us in awe, but which we shall never understand. One may say “the 
eternal mystery of the world is its comprehensibility.” It is one of the great 
realizations of Immanuel Kant that the setting up of a real external world 
would be senseless without this comprehensibility. 

In speaking here concerning “comprehensibility,” the expression is used in 
its most modest sense. It implies: the production of some sort of order among 


sense impressions, this order being produced by the creation of general 
concepts, relations between these concepts, and by relations between the 
concepts and sense experience, these relations being determined in any 
possible manner. It is in this sense that the world of our sense experiences is 
comprehensible. The fact that it is comprehensible is a miracle. 

In my opinion, nothing can be said concerning the manner in which the 
concepts are to be made and connected, and how we are to coordinate them 
to the experiences. In guiding us in the creation of such an order of sense 
experiences, success in the result is alone the determining factor. All that is 
necessary is the statement of a set of rules, since without such rules the 
acquisition of knowledge in the desired sense would be impossible. One may 
compare these rules with the rules of a game in which, while the rules 
themselves are arbitrary, it is their rigidity alone which makes the game 
possible. However, the fixation will never be final. It will have validity only 
for a special field of application (i.e. there are no final categories in the sense 
of Kant). 

The connection of the elementary concepts of everyday thinking with 
complexes of sense experiences can only be comprehended intuitively and it 
is unadaptable to scientifically logical fixation. The totality of these 
connections—none of which is expressible in notional terms—is the only 
thing which differentiates the great building which is science from a logical 
but empty scheme of concepts. By means of these connections, the purely 
notional theorems of science become statements about complexes of sense 
experiences. 

We shall call “primary concepts” such concepts as are directly and 
intuitively connected with typical complexes of sense experiences. All other 
notions are—from the physical point of view—possessed of meaning, only in 
so far as they are connected, by theorems, with the primary notions. These 
theorems are partially definitions of the concepts (and of the statements 
derived logically from them) and partially theorems not derivable from the 
definitions, which express at least indirect relations between the “primary 
concepts,” and in this way between sense experiences. Theorems of the latter 
kind are “statements about reality” or laws of nature, i.e. theorems which 
have to show their usefulness when applied to sense experiences 
comprehended by primary concepts. The question as to which of the 
theorems shall be considered as definitions and which as natural laws will 


depend largely upon the chosen representation. It really becomes absolutely 
necessary to make this differentiation only when one examines the degree to 
which the whole system of concepts considered is not empty from the 
physical point of view. 


Stratification of the Scientific System 


The aim of science is, on the one hand, a comprehension, as complete as 
possible, of the connection between the sense experiences in their totality, 
and, on the other hand, the accomplishment of this aim by the use of a 
minimum of primary concepts and relations. (Seeking, as far as possible, 
logical unity in the world picture, i.e. paucity in logical elements.) 

Science concerns the totality of the primary concepts, i.e. concepts directly 
connected with sense experiences, and theorems connecting them. In its first 
stage of development, science does not contain anything else. Our everyday 
thinking is satisfied on the whole with this level. Such a state of affairs 
cannot, however, satisfy a spirit which is really scientifically minded; because, 
the totality of concepts and relations obtained in this manner is utterly lacking 
in logical unity. In order to supplement this deficiency, one invents a system 
poorer in concepts and relations, a system retaining the primary concepts and 
relations of the “first layer” as logically derived concepts and relations. This 
new “secondary system” pays for its higher logical unity by having, as its own 
elementary concepts (concepts of the second layer), only those which are no 
longer directly connected with complexes of sense experiences. Further 
striving for logical unity brings us to a tertiary system, still poorer in concepts 
and relations, for the deduction of the concepts and relations of the secondary 
(and so indirectly of the primary) layer. Thus the story goes on until we have 
arrived at a system of the greatest conceivable unity, and of the greatest 
poverty of concepts of the logical foundations, which are still compatible with 
the observation made by our senses. We do not know whether or not this 
ambition will ever result in a definite system. If one is asked for his opinion, 
he is inclined to answer no. While wrestling with the problems, however, one 
will never give up the hope that this greatest of all aims can really be attained 
to a very high degree. 


An adherent to the theory of abstraction or induction might call our layers 
“degrees of abstraction” but, I do not consider it justifiable to veil the logical 
independence of the concept from the sense experiences. The relation is not 
analogous to that of soup to beef but rather of wardrobe number to overcoat. 

The layers are furthermore not clearly separated. It is not even absolutely 
clear which concepts belong to the primary layer. As a matter of fact, we are 
dealing with freely formed concepts, which, with a certainty sufficient for 
practical use, are intuitively connected with complexes of sense experiences 
in such a manner that, in any given case of experience, there is no uncertainty 
as to the applicability or non-applicability of the statement. The essential 
thing is the aim to represent the multitude of concepts and theorems, close to 
experience, as theorems, logically deduced and belonging to a basis, as 
narrow as possible, of fundamental concepts and fundamental relations which 
themselves can be chosen freely (axioms). The liberty of choice, however, is 
of a special kind; it is not in any way similar to the liberty of a writer of 
fiction. Rather, it is similar to that of a man engaged in solving a well 
designed word puzzle. He may, it is true, propose any word as the solution; 
but, there is only one word which really solves the puzzle in all its forms. It is 
an outcome of faith that nature—as she is perceptible to our five senses— 
takes the character of such a well formulated puzzle. The successes reaped up 
to now by science do, it is true, give a certain encouragement for this faith. 

The multitude of layers discussed above corresponds to the several stages 
of progress which have resulted from the struggle for unity in the course of 
development. As regards the final aim, intermediary layers are only of 
temporary nature. They must eventually disappear as irrelevant. We have to 
deal, however, with the science of today, in which these strata represent 
problematic partial successes which support one another but which also 
threaten one another, because today’s systems of concepts contain deep 
seated incongruities which we shall meet later on. 

It will be the aim of the following lines to demonstrate what paths the 
constructive human mind has entered, in order to arrive at a basis of physics 
which is logically as uniform as possible. 


§ 2. Mechanics and the Attempts to Base All Physics Upon It 


An important property of our sense experiences, and, more generally, of all 
of our experience, is its time-like order. This kind of order leads to the 
mental conception of a subjective time, an ordinating scheme for our 
experience. The subjective time leads then through the concept of the bodily 
object and of space, to the concept of objective time, as we shall see later on. 

Ahead of the notion of objective time there is, however, the concept of 
space; and, ahead of the latter we find the concept of the bodily object. The 
latter is directly connected with complexes of sense experiences. It has been 
pointed out that one property which is characteristic of the notion “bodily 
object” is the property which provides that we coordinate to it an existence, 
independent of (subjective) time, and independent of the fact that it is 
perceived by our senses. We do this in spite of the fact that we perceive 
temporal alterations in it. Poincaré has justly emphasized the fact that we 
distinguish two kinds of alterations of the bodily object, “changes of state” 
and “changes of position.” The latter, he remarked, are alterations which we 
can reverse by arbitrary motions of our bodies. 

That there are bodily objects to which we have to ascribe, within a certain 
sphere of perception, no alteration of state, but only alterations of position, is 
a fact of fundamental importance for the formation of the concept of space 
(in a certain degree even for the justification of the notion of the bodily object 
itself). Let us call such an object “practically rigid.” 

If, as the object of our perception, we consider simultaneously (i.e. as a 
single unit) two practically rigid bodies, then there exist for this ensemble 
such alterations as can not possibly be considered as changes of position of 
the whole, notwithstanding the fact that this is the case for each one of the 
two constituents. This leads to the notion of “change of relative position” of 
the two objects; and, in this way, also to the notion of “relative position” of 
the two objects. It is found moreover that among the relative positions, there 
is one of a specific kind which we designate as “Contact.”! Permanent contact 
of two bodies in three or more “points” means that they are united as a quasi 
rigid compound body. It is permissible to say that the second body forms then 
a (quasi rigid) continuation on the first body and may, in its turn, be 
continued quasi rigidly. The possibility of the quasi rigid continuation of a 
body is unlimited. The real essence of the conceivable quasi rigid 
continuation of a body Bg is the infinite “space” determined by it. 


In my opinion, the fact that every bodily object situated in any arbitrary 
manner can be put into contact with the quasi rigid continuation of a 
predetermined and chosen body Bọ (body of relation), this fact is the 


empirical basis of our conception of space. In pre-scientific thinking, the 
solid earth's crust plays the role of By and its continuation. The very name 


geometry indicates that the concept of space is psychologically connected 
with the earth as an assigned body. 

The bold notion of “space” which preceded all scientific geometry 
transformed our mental concept of the relations of positions of bodily objects 
into the notion of the position of these bodily objects in “space.” This, of 
itself, represents a great formal simplification. Through this concept of space 
one reaches, moreover, an attitude in which any description of position is 
admittedly a description of contact; the statement that a point of a bodily 
object is located at a point P of space means that the object touches the point 
P of the standard body of reference Bọ (supposed appropriately continued) at 


the point considered. 

In the geometry of the Greeks, space plays only a qualitative role, since the 
position of bodies in relation to space is considered as given, it is true, but is 
not described by means of numbers. Descartes was the first to introduce this 
method. In his language, the whole content of Euclidian geometry can 
axiomatically be founded upon the following statements: (1) Two specified 
points of a rigid body determine a distance. (2) We may coordinate triplets of 
numbers X; X,, Xz, to points of space in such a manner that for every 


distance P’-—P” under consideration, the coordinates of whose end points are 
X1/, Xo’, X3 X1”, X2”, X3”, the expression 


S? = (XK, -X + (X,” — X,’)? + (K,” -XY 


is independent of the position of the body, and of the positions of any and all 
other bodies. 

The (positive) number S means the length of the stretch, or the distance 
between the two points P’ and P” of space (which are coincident with the 
points P’ and P” of the stretch). 


The formulation is chosen, intentionally, in such a way that it expresses 
clearly, not only the logical and axiomatic, but also the empirical content of 
Euclidian geometry. The purely logical (axiomatic) representation of 
Euclidian geometry has, it is true, the advantage of greater simplicity and 
clarity. It pays for this, however, by renouncing representation of the 
connection between the notional construction and the sense experience upon 
which connection, alone, the significance of geometry for physics rests. The 
fatal error that the necessity of dunking, preceding all experience, was at the 
basis of Euclidian geometry and the concept of space belonging to it, this 
fatal error arose from the fact that the empirical basis, on which the axiomatic 
construction of Euclidian geometry rests, had fallen into oblivion. 

In so far as one can speak of the existence of rigid bodies in nature, 
Euclidian geometry is a physical science, the usefulness of which must be 
shown by application to sense experiences. It relates to the totality of laws 
which must hold for the relative positions of rigid bodies independently of 
time. As one may see, the physical notion of space also, as originally used in 
physics, is tied to the existence of rigid bodies. 

From the physicist’s point of view, the central importance of Euclidian 
geometry rests in the fact that its laws are independent of the specific nature 
of the bodies whose relative positions it discusses. Its formal simplicity is 
characterized by the properties of homogeneity and isotropy (and the 
existence of similar entities). 

The concept of space is, it is true, useful, but not indispensable for 
geometry proper, i.e. for the formulation of rules about the relative positions 
of rigid bodies. In opposition to this, the concept of objective time, without 
which the formulation of the fundamentals of classical mechanics is 
impossible, is linked with the concept of the spacial continuum. 

The introduction of objective time involves two statements which are 
independent of each other. 

(1) The introduction of the objective local time by connecting the temporal 
sequence of experiences with the indications of a “clock,” i.e. of a closed 
system with periodical occurrence. 

(2) The introduction of the notion of objective time for the happenings in 
the whole space, by which notion alone the idea of local time is enlarged to 
the idea of time in physics. 


Note concerning (1). As I see it, it does not mean a “petitio principii” if 
one puts the concept of periodical occurrence ahead of the concept of time, 
while one is concerned with the clarification of the origin and of the empirical 
content of the concept of time. Such a conception corresponds exactly to the 
precedence of the concept of the rigid (or quasi rigid) body in the 
interpretation of the concept of space. 

Further discussion of (2). The illusion which prevailed prior to the 
enunciation of the theory of relativity—that, from the point of view of 
experience the meaning of simultaneity in relation to happenings distant in 
space and consequently that the meaning of time in physics is a priori clear— 
this illusion had its origin in the fact that in our everyday experience, we can 
neglect the time of propagation of light. We are accustomed on this account 
to fail to differentiate between “simultaneously seen” and “simultaneously 
happening” and, as a result the difference between time and local time fades 
away. 

The lack of definiteness which, from the point of view of empirical 
importance, adheres to the notion of time in classical mechanics was veiled 
by the axiomatic representation of space and time as things given 
independently of our senses. Such a use of notions—independent of the 
empirical basis, to which they owe their existence—does not necessarily 
damage science. One may however easily be led into the error of believing 
that these notions, whose origin is forgotten, are necessary and unalterable 
accompaniments to our thinking, and this error may constitute a serious 
danger to the progress of science. 

It was fortunate for the development of mechanics and hence also for the 
development of physics in general, that the lack of definiteness in the concept 
of objective time remained obscured from the earlier philosophers as regards 
its empirical interpretation. Full of confidence in the real meaning of the 
space-time construction they developed the foundations of mechanics which 
we shall characterize, schematically, as follows: 

(a) Concept of a material point: a bodily object which—as regards its 
position and motion—can be described with sufficient exactness as a point 
with coordinates X,, X>, X3. Description of its motion (in relation to the 


“space” Bo) by giving Xj, X2, X3, as functions of the time. 


20 


(b) Law of inertia: the disappearance of the components of acceleration for 
the material point which is sufficiently far away from all other points. 

(c) Law of motion (for the material point): Force = mass X acceleration. 

(d) Laws of force (actions and reactions between material points). 

In this (b) is nothing more than an important special case of (c). A real 
theory exists only when the laws of force are given. The forces must in the 
first place only obey the law of equality of action and reaction in order that a 
system of points—permanently connected to each other—may behave like 
one material point. 

These fundamental laws, together with Newton's law for gravitational 
force, form the basis of the mechanics of celestial bodies. In this mechanics 
of Newton, and in contrast to the above conceptions of space derived from 
rigid bodies, the space Bo enters in a form which contains a new idea; it is not 


for every Bọ that validity is required (for a given law of force) by (b) and (c), 
but only for a Bp in the appropriate condition of motion (inertial system). On 


account of this fact, the coordinate space acquired an independent physical 
property which is not contained in the purely geometrical notion of space, a 
circumstance which gave Newton considerable food for thought (pail- 
experiment).2 

Classical mechanics is only a general scheme; it becomes a theory only by 
explicit indication of the force laws (d) as was done so very successfully by 
Newton for celestial mechanics. From the point of view of the aim of the 
greatest logical simplicity of the foundations, this theoretical method is 
deficient in so far as the laws of force cannot be obtained by logical and 
formal considerations, so that their choice is a priori to a large extent 
arbitrary. Also Newton’s gravitation law of force is distinguished from other 
conceivable laws of force exclusively by its success. 

In spite of the fact that, today, we know positively that classical mechanics 
fails as a foundation dominating all physics, it still occupies the center of all 
of our thinking in physics. The reason for this lies in the fact that, regardless 
of important progress reached since the time of Newton, we have not yet 
arrived at a new foundation of physics concerning which we may be certain 
that the whole complexity of investigated phenomena, and of partial 
theoretical systems of a successful kind, could be deduced logically from it. 
In the following lines I shall try to describe briefly how the matter stands. 


21 


First we try to get clearly in our minds how far the system of classical 
mechanics has shown itself adequate to serve as a basis for the whole of 
physics. Since we are dealing here only with the foundations of physics and 
with its development, we need not concern ourselves with the purely formal 
progresses of mechanics (equation of Lagrange, canonical equations, etc.). 
One remark, however, appears indispensable. The notion “material point” is 
fundamental for mechanics. If now we seek the mechanics of a bodily object 
which itself can not be treated as a material point—and strictly speaking 
every object “perceptible to our senses” is of this category—then the question 
arises: How shall we imagine the object to be built up out of material points, 
and what forces must we assume as acting between them? The formulation of 
this question is indispensable, if mechanics is to pretend to describe the 
object completely. 

It is natural to the tendency of mechanics to assume these material points, 
and the laws of forces acting between them, as invariable, since time 
alterations would lie outside of the scope of mechanical explanation. From 
this we can see that classical mechanics must lead us to an atomistic 
construction of matter. We now realize, with special clarity, how much in 
error are those theorists who believe that theory comes inductively from 
experience. Even the great Newton could not free himself from this error 
(“Hypotheses non fingo”). 

In order to save itself from becoming hopelessly lost in this line of thought 
(atomistic), science proceeded first in the following manner. The mechanics 
of a system is determined if its potential energy is given as a function of its 
configuration. Now, if the acting forces are of such a kind as to guarantee 
maintenance of certain qualities of order of the system’s configuration, then 
the configuration may be described with sufficient accuracy by a relatively 
small number of configuration variables q,; the potential energy is considered 


only insofar as it is dependent upon these variables (for instance, description 
of the configuration of a practically rigid body by six variables). 

A second method of application of mechanics, which avoids the 
consideration of a subdivision of matter down to “real” material points, is the 
mechanics of so-called continuous media. This mechanics is characterized by 
the fiction that the density of matter and speed of matter is dependent in a 
continuous manner upon coordinates and time, and that the part of the 


22 


interactions not explicitly given can be considered as surface forces (pressure 
forces) which again are continuous functions of location. Herein we find the 
hydrodynamic theory, and the theory of elasticity of solid bodies. These 
theories avoid the explicit introduction of material points by fictions which, in 
the light of the foundation of classical mechanics, can only have an 
approximate significance. 

In addition to their great practical significance, these categories of science 
have—by enlargement of the mathematical world of ideas—created those 
formal auxiliary instruments (partial differential equations) which have been 
necessary for the subsequent attempts at formulating the total scheme of 
physics in a manner which is new as compared with that of Newton. 

These two modes of application of mechanics belong to the so-called 
“phenomenological” physics. It is characteristic of this kind of physics that it 
makes as much use as possible of concepts which are close to experience but 
which, for this reason, have to give up, to a large degree, unity in the 
foundations. Heat, electricity and light are described by special variables of 
state and constants of matter other than the mechanical state; and to 
determine all of these variables in their relative dependence was a rather 
empirical task. Many contemporaries of Maxwell saw in such a manner of 
presentation the ultimate aim of physics, which they thought could be 
obtained purely inductively from experience on account of the relative 
closeness of the concepts used to the experience. From the point of view of 
theories of knowledge St. Mill and E. Mach took their stand approximately 
on this ground. 

According to my belief, the greatest achievement of Newton’s mechanics 
lies in the fact that its consistent application has led beyond this 
phenomenological representation, particularly in the field of heat phenomena. 
This occurred in the kinetic theory of gases and, in a general way, in 
statistical mechanics. The former connected the equation of state of the ideal 
gases, viscosity, diffusion and heat conductivity of gases and radiometric 
phenomena of gases, and gave the logical connection of phenomena which, 
from the point of view of direct experience, had nothing whatever to do with 
one another. The latter gave a mechanical interpretation of the 
thermodynamic ideas and laws as well as the discovery of the limit of 
applicability of the notions and laws to the classical theory of heat. This 
kinetic theory which surpassed, by far, the phenomenological physics as 


23 


regards the logical unity of its foundations, produced moreover definite values 
for the true magnitudes of atoms and molecules which resulted from several 
independent methods and were thus placed beyond the realm of reasonable 
doubt. These decisive progresses were paid for by the coordination of 
atomistic entities to the material points, the constructively speculative 
character of which entities being obvious. Nobody could hope ever to 
“perceive directly” an atom. Laws concerning variables connected more 
directly with experimental facts (for example: temperature, pressure, speed) 
were deduced from the fundamental ideas by means of complicated 
calculations. In this manner physics (at least part of it), originally more 
phenomenologically constructed, was reduced, by being founded upon 
Newton’s mechanics for atoms and molecules, to a basis further removed 
from direct experiment, but more uniform in character. 


§ 3. The Field Concept 


In explaining optical and electrical phenomena Newton’s mechanics has been 
far less successful than it had been in the fields cited above. It is true that 
Newton tried to reduce light to the motion of material points in his 
corpuscular theory of light. Later on, however, as the phenomena of 
polarization, diffraction and interference of light forced upon his theory more 
and more unnatural modifications, Huyghens’ undulatory theory of light, 
prevailed. Probably this theory owes its origin essentially to the phenomena of 
crystallographic optics and to the theory of sound, which was then already 
elaborated to a certain degree. It must be admitted that Huyghens’ theory also 
was based in the first instance upon classical mechanics; but, the all- 
penetrating ether had to be assumed as the carrier of the waves and the 
structure of the ether, formed from material points, could not be explained by 
any known phenomenon. One could never get a clear picture of the interior 
forces governing the ether, nor of the forces acting between the ether and the 
“ponderable” matter. The foundations of this theory remained, therefore, 
eternally in the dark. The true basis was a partial differential equation, the 
reduction of which to mechanical elements remained always problematic. 

For the theoretical conception of electric and magnetic phenomena one 
introduced, again, masses of a special kind, and between these masses one 


24 


assumed the existence of forces acting at a distance, similar to Newton’s 
gravitational forces. This special kind of matter, however, appeared to be 
lacking in the fundamental property of inertia; and, the forces acting between 
these masses and the ponderable matter remained obscure. To these 
difficulties there had to be added the polar character of these kinds of matter 
which did not fit into the scheme of classical mechanics. The basis of the 
theory became still more unsatisfactory when electrodynamic phenomena 
became known, notwithstanding the fact that these phenomena brought the 
physicist to the explanation of magnetic phenomena through electrodynamic 
phenomena and, in this way, made the assumption of magnetic masses 
superfluous. This progress had, indeed, to be paid for by increasing the 
complexity of the forces of interaction which had to be assumed as existing 
between electrical masses in motion. 

The escape from this unsatisfactory situation by the electric field theory of 
Faraday and Maxwell represents probably the most profound transformation 
which has been experienced by the foundations of physics since Newton’s 
time. Again, it has been a step in the direction of constructive speculation 
which has increased the distance between the foundation of the theory and 
what can be experienced by means of our five senses. The existence of the 
field manifests itself, indeed, only when electrically charged bodies are 
introduced into it. The differential equations of Maxwell connect the spacial 
and temporal differential coefficients of the electric and magnetic fields. The 
electric masses are nothing more than places of non-disappearing divergency 
of the electric field. Light waves appear as undulatory electromagnetic field 
processes in space. 

To be sure, Maxwell still tried to interpret his field theory mechanically by 
means of mechanical ether models. But these attempts receded gradually to 
the background following the representation—purged of any unnecessary 
additions—by Heinrich Hertz, so that, in this theory the field finally took the 
fundamental position which had been occupied in Newton’s mechanics by the 
material points. At first, however, this applies only for electromagnetic fields 
in empty space. 

In its initial stage the theory was yet quite unsatisfactory for the interior of 
matter, because there, two electric vectors had to be introduced, which were 
connected by relations dependent on the nature of the medium, these 
relations being inaccessible to any theoretical analysis. An analogous situation 


25 


arose in connection with the magnetic field, as well as in the relation between 
electric current density and the field. 

Here H. A. Lorentz found an escape which showed, at the same time, the 
way to an electrodynamic theory of bodies in motion, a theory which was 
more or less free of arbitrary assumption. His theory was built on the 
following fundamental hypothesis: 

Everywhere (including the interior of ponderable bodies) the seat of the 
field is the empty space. The participation of matter in electromagnetic 
phenomena has its origin only in the fact that the elementary particles of 
matter carry unalterable electric charges, and, on this account are subject on 
the one hand to the actions of ponderomotive forces and on the other hand 
possess the property of generating a field. The elementary particles obey 
Newton’s law of motion for the material point. 

This is the basis on which H. A. Lorentz obtained his synthesis of 
Newton’s mechanics and Maxwell’s field theory. The weakness of this theory 
lies in the fact that it tried to determine the phenomena by a combination of 
partial differential equations (Maxwell’s field equations for empty space) and 
total differential equations (equations of motion of points), which procedure 
was obviously unnatural. The unsatisfactory part of the theory showed up 
externally by the necessity of assuming finite dimensions for the particles in 
order to prevent the electromagnetic field existing at their surfaces from 
becoming infinitely great. The theory failed moreover to give any explanation 
concerning the tremendous forces which hold the electric charges on the 
individual particles. H. A. Lorentz accepted these weaknesses of his theory, 
which were well known to him, in order to explain the phenomena correctly 
at least as regards their general lines. 

Furthermore, there was one consideration which reached beyond the frame 
of Lorentz’s theory. In the environment of an electrically charged body there 
is a magnetic field which furnishes an (apparent) contribution to its inertia. 
Should it not be possible to explain the total inertia of the particles 
electromagnetically? It is clear that this problem could be worked out 
satisfactorily only if the particles could be interpreted as regular solutions of 
the electromagnetic partial differential equations. The Maxwell equations in 
their original form do not, however, allow such a description of particles, 
because their corresponding solutions contain a singularity. Theoretical 
physicists have tried for a long time, therefore, to reach the goal by a 


26 


modification of Maxwell’s equations. These attempts have, however, not been 
crowned with success. Thus it happened that the goal of erecting a pure 
electromagnetic field theory of matter remained unattained for the time 
being, although in principle no objection could be raised against the 
possibility of reaching such a goal. The thing which deterred one in any 
further attempt in this direction was the lack of any systematic method 
leading to the solution. What appears certain to me, however, is that, in the 
foundations of any consistent field theory, there shall not be, in addition to the 
concept of field, any concept concerning particles. The whole theory must be 
based solely on partial differential equations and their singularity-free 
solutions. 


§ 4. The Theory of Relativity 


There is no inductive method which could lead to the fundamental concepts 
of physics. Failure to understand this fact constituted the basic philosophical 
error of so many investigators of the nineteenth century. It was probably the 
reason why the molecular theory, and Maxwell’s theory were able to establish 
themselves only at a relatively late date. Logical thinking is necessarily 
deductive; it is based upon hypothetical concepts and axioms. How can we 
hope to choose the latter in such a manner as to justify us in expecting 
success as a consequence? 

The most satisfactory situation is evidently to be found in cases where the 
new fundamental hypotheses are suggested by the world of experience itself. 
The hypothesis of the non-existence of perpetual motion as a basis for 
thermodynamics affords such an example of a fundamental hypothesis 
suggested by experience; the same thing holds for the principle of inertia of 
Galileo. In the same category, moreover, we find the fundamental hypotheses 
of the theory of relativity, which theory has led to an unexpected expansion 
and broadening of the field theory, and to the superseding of the foundations 
of classical mechanics. 

The successes of the Maxwell-Lorentz theory have given great confidence 
in the validity of the electromagnetic equations for empty space and hence, in 
particular, to the statement that light travels “in space” with a certain constant 
speed c. Is this law of the invariability of light velocity in relation to any 


27 


desired inertial system valid? If it were not, then one specific inertial system 
or more accurately, one specific state of motion (of a body of reference), 
would be distinguished from all others. In opposition to this idea, however, 
stand all the mechanical and electromagnetic-optical facts of our experience. 
For these reasons it was necessary to raise to the degree of a principle, the 
validity of the law of constancy of light velocity for all inertial systems. From 
this, it follows that the spacial coordinates X,, X2, X3, and the time X4, must 


be transformed according to the “Lorentz-transformation” which is 
characterized by invariance of the expression 


ds? = dx,? + dx, +dx," = dx? 


(if the unit of time is chosen in such a manner that the speed of light c = 1). 

By this procedure time lost its absolute character, and was included with 
the “spacial” coordinates as of algebraically (nearly) similar character. The 
absolute character of time and particularly of simultaneity were destroyed, 
and the four dimensional description became introduced as the only adequate 
one. 

In order to account, also, for the equivalence of all inertial systems with 
regard to all the phenomena of nature, it is necessary to postulate invariance 
of all systems of physical equations which express general laws, with regard 
to the Lorentzian transformation. The elaboration of this requirement forms 
the content of the special theory of relativity. 

This theory is compatible with the equations of Maxwell; but, it is 
incompatible with the basis of classical mechanics. It is true that the 
equations of motion of the material point can be modified (and with them the 
expressions for momentum and kinetic energy of the material point) in such a 
manner as to satisfy the theory; but, the concept of the force of interaction, 
and with it the concept of potential energy of a system, lose their basis, 
because these concepts rest upon the idea of absolute instantaneousness. The 
field, as determined by differential equations, takes the place of the force. 

Since the foregoing theory allows interaction only by fields, it requires a 
field theory of gravitation. Indeed, it is not difficult to formulate such a theory 
in which, as in Newton’s theory, the gravitational fields can be reduced to a 
scalar which is the solution of a partial differential equation. However, the 


28 


experimental facts expressed in Newton’s theory of gravitation lead in another 
direction, that of the general theory of relativity. 

Classical mechanics contains one point which is unsatisfactory in that, in 
the fundamentals, the same mass constant is met twice over in two different 
roles, namely as “inertial mass” in the law of motion, and as “gravitational 
mass” in the law of gravitation. As a result of this, the acceleration of a body 
in a pure gravitational field is independent of its material; or, in a coordinate 
system of uniform acceleration (accelerated in relation to an “inertial system”) 
the motions take place as they would in a homogeneous gravitational field (in 
relation to a “motionless” system of coordinates). If one assumes that the 
equivalence of these two cases is complete, then one attains an adaptation of 
our theoretical thinking to the fact that the gravitational and inertial masses 
are identical. 

From this it follows that there is no longer any reason for favoring, as a 
fundamental principle, the “inertial systems”; and, we must admit as 
equivalent in their own right, also non-linear transformations of the 
coordinates (x4, X2, X3, X4). If we make such a transformation of a system of 


coordinates of the special theory of relativity, then the metric 


ds? = diy" + dx, + dx,” = ax? 


goes over to a general (Riemannian) metric of Bane 


ds? = Zuv Ax, dx, (Summed over u and v) 


where the gy symmetrical in u and v, are certain functions of x; ... x4 which 


describe both the metric property, and the gravitational field in relation to the 
new system of coordinates. 

The foregoing improvement in the interpretation of the mechanical basis 
must, however, be paid for in that—as becomes evident on closer scrutiny— 
the new coordinates could no longer be interpreted, as results of 
measurements by rigid bodies and clocks, as they could in the original system 
(an inertial system with vanishing gravitational field). 


29 


The passage to the general theory of relativity is realized by the assumption 
that such a representation of the field properties of space already mentioned, 
by functions g,,,, (that is to say by a Riemann metric), is also justified in the 


general case in which there is no system of coordinates in relation to which 
the metric takes the simple quasi-Euclidian form of the special theory of 
relativity. 

Now the coordinates, by themselves, no longer express metric relations, but 
only the “neighborliness” of the things described, whose coordinates differ 
but little from one another. All transformations of the coordinates have to be 
admitted so long as these transformations are free from singularities. Only 
such equations as are covariant in relation to arbitrary transformations in this 
sense have meaning as expressions of general law of nature (postulate of 
general covariancy). 

The first aim of the general theory of relativity was a preliminary statement 
which, by giving up the requirement of constituting a closed thing in itself, 
could be connected in as simple a manner as possible with the “facts directly 
observed.” Newton’s gravitational theory gave an example, by restricting itself 
to the pure mechanics of gravitation. This preliminary statement may be 
characterized as follows: 

(1) The concept of the material point and of its mass is retained. A law of 
motion is given for it, this law of motion being the translation of the law of 
inertia into the language of the general theory of relativity. This law is a 
system of total differential equations, the system characteristic of the geodetic 
line. 

(2) In place of Newton's law of interaction by gravitation, we shall find the 
system of the simplest generally covariant differential equations which can be 
set up for the g,,-tensor. It is formed by equating to zero the once contracted 
Riemannian curvature tensor (Ruy =(). 

This formulation permits the treatment of the problem of the planets. More 
accurately speaking, it allows the treatment of the problem of motion of 
material points of practically negligible mass in the gravitational field 
produced by a material point which itself is supposed to have no motion 
(central symmetry). It does not take into account the reaction of the “moved” 
material points on the gravitational field, nor does it consider how the central 
mass produces this gravitational field. 


30 


Analogy with classical mechanics shows that the following is a way to 
complete the theory. One sets up as field equation 


Ra — Vega = — Te 


where R represents the scalar of Riemannian curvature, T; the energy tensor 


of the matter in a phenomenological representation. The left side of the 
equation is chosen in such a manner that its divergence disappears identically. 
The resulting disappearance of the divergence of the right side produces the 
“equations of motion” of matter, in the form of partial differential equations 
for the case where 7;, introduces, for the description of the matter, only four 


further functions independent of each other (for instance, density, pressure, 
and velocity components, where there is between the latter an identity, and 
between pressure and density an equation of condition). 

By this formulation one reduces the whole mechanics of gravitation to the 
solution of a single system of covariant partial differential equations. The 
theory avoids all internal discrepancies which we have charged against the 
basis of classical mechanics. It is sufficient—as far as we know—for the 
representation of the observed facts of celestial mechanics. But, it is similar 
to a building, one wing of which is made of fine marble (left part of the 
equation), but the other wing of which is built of low grade wood (right side 
of equation). The phenomenological representation of matter is, in fact, only 
a crude substitute for a representation which would correspond to all known 
properties of matter. 

There is no difficulty in connecting Maxwell's theory of the 
electromagnetic field with the theory of the gravitational field so long as one 
restricts himself to space, free of ponderable matter and free of electric 
density. All that is necessary is to put on the right hand side of the above 
equation for 7;,, the energy tensor of the electromagnetic field in empty space 
and to associate with the so modified system of equations the Maxwell field 
equation for empty space, written in general covariant form. Under these 
conditions there will exist, between all these equations, a sufficient number of 
the differential identities to guarantee their consistency. We may add that this 
necessary formal property of the total system of equations leaves arbitrary the 


31 


choice of the sign of the member 7;,, a fact which was later shown to be 


important. 

The desire to have, for the foundations of the theory, the greatest possible 
unity has resulted in several attempts to include the gravitational field and the 
electromagnetic field in one formal but homogeneous picture. Here we must 
mention particularly the five-dimensional theory of Kaluza and Klein. Having 
considered this possibility very carefully I feel that it is more desirable to 
accept the lack of internal uniformity of the original theory, because I do not 
consider that the totality of the hypothetical basis of the five-dimensional 
theory contains less of an arbitrary nature than does the original theory. The 
same statement may be made for the projective variety of the theory, which 
has been elaborated with great care, in particular, by v. Dantzig and by Pauli. 

The foregoing considerations concern, exclusively, the theory of the field, 
free of matter. How are we to proceed from this point in order to obtain a 
complete theory of atomically constructed matter? In such a theory, 
singularities must certainly be excluded, since without such exclusion the 
differential equations do not completely determine the total field. Here, in the 
field theory of general relativity, we meet the same problem of a theoretical 
field-representation of matter as was met originally in connection with the 
pure Maxwell theory. 

Here again the attempt to construct particles out of the field theory, leads 
apparently to singularities. Here also the endeavor has been made to 
overcome this defect by the introduction of new field variables and by 
elaborating and extending the system of field equations. Recently, however, I 
discovered, in collaboration with Dr. Rosen, that the above mentioned 
simplest combination of the field equations of gravitation and electricity 
produces centrally symmetrical solutions which can be represented as free of 
singularity (the well known centrally symmetrical solutions of Schwarzschild 
for the pure gravitational field, and those of Reissner for the electric field with 
consideration of its gravitational action). We shall refer to this shortly in the 
paragraph next but one. In this way it seems possible to get for matter and its 
interactions a pure field theory free of additional hypotheses, one moreover 
whose test by submission to facts of experience does not result in difficulties 
other than purely mathematical ones, which difficulties, however, are very 
serious. 


32 


§ 5. Quantum Theory_and the Fundamentals of Physics 


The theoretical physicists of our generation are expecting the erection of a 
new theoretical basis for physics which would make use of fundamental 
concepts greatly different from those of the field theory considered up to now. 
The reason is that it has been found necessary to use—for the mathematical 
representation of the so-called quantum phenomena—new sorts of methods 
of consideration. 

While the failure of classical mechanics, as revealed by the theory of 
relativity, is connected with the finite speed of light (its avoidance of being 
co), it was discovered at the beginning of our century that there were other 
kinds of inconsistencies between deductions from mechanics and 
experimental facts, which inconsistencies are connected with the finite 
magnitude (the avoidance of being zero) of Planck's constant h. In particular, 
while molecular mechanics requires that both, heat content and 
(monochromatic) radiation density, of solid bodies should decrease in 
proportion to the decreasing absolute temperature, experience has shown that 
they decrease much more rapidly than the absolute temperature. For a 
theoretical explanation of this behavior it was necessary to assume that the 
energy of a mechanical system cannot assume any sort of value, but only 
certain discrete values whose mathematical expressions were always 
dependent upon Planck's constant h. Moreover, this conception was essential 
for the theory of the atom (Bohr's theory). For the transitions of these states 
into one another—with or without emission or absorption of radiation—no 
causal laws could be given, but only statistical ones; and, a similar conclusion 
holds for the radioactive decomposition of atoms, which decomposition was 
carefully investigated about the same time. For more than two decades 
physicists tried vainly to find a uniform interpretation of this “quantum 
character” of systems and phenomena. Such an attempt was successful about 
ten years ago, through the agency of two entirely different theoretical methods 
of attack. We owe one of these to Heisenberg and Dirac, and the other to de 
Broglie and Schrödinger. The mathematical equivalence of the two methods 
was soon recognized by Schrödinger. I shall try here to sketch the line of 
thought of de Broglie and Schrédinger, which lies closer to the physicist's 


33 


method of thinking, and shall accompany the description with certain general 
considerations. 

The question is first: How can one assign a discrete succession of energy 
value H, to a system specified in the sense of classical mechanics (the energy 


function is a given function of the coordinates q, and the corresponding 
momenta p,)? Planck's constant h relates the frequency H./h to the energy 


values H,. It is therefore sufficient to give to the system a succession of 
discrete frequency values. This reminds us of the fact that in acoustics, a 
series of discrete frequency values is coordinated to a linear partial 
differential equation (if boundary values are given) namely the sinusoidal 
periodic solutions. In corresponding manner, Schrédinger set himself the task 
of coordinating a partial differential equation for a scalar function $ to the 
given energy function € (q,, ~,), Where the q, and the time ¢ are independent 


variables. In this he succeeded (for a complex function 4) in such a manner 
that the theoretical values of the energy H,, as required by the statistical 
theory, actually resulted in a satisfactory manner from the periodic solution of 
the equation. 

To be sure, it did not happen to be possible to associate a definite 
movement, in the sense of mechanics of material points, with a definite 
solution ¢ (q,, À of the Schrödinger equation. This means that the 4 function 


does not determine, at any rate exactly, the story of the q, as functions of the 


time t. According to Born, however, an interpretation of the physical meaning 
of the 4 functions was shown to be possible in the following manner: 4 4 (the 
square of the absolute value of the complex function 4) is the probability 
density at the point under consideration in the configuration-space of the q, at 


the time ¢. It is therefore possible to characterize the content of the 
Schrödinger equation in a manner, easy to be understood, but not quite 
accurate, as follows: it determines how the probability density of a statistical 
ensemble of systems varies in the configuration-space with the time. Briefly: 
the Schrödinger equation determines the alteration of the function ¢ of the q, 
with the time. 

It must be mentioned that the result of this theory contains—as limiting 
values—the result of the particle mechanics if the wave-length encountered 
during the solution of the Schrédinger problem is everywhere so small that 


34 


the potential energy varies by a practically infinitely small amount for a 
change of one wave-length in the configuration-space. Under these conditions 
the following can in fact be shown: We choose a region Gp in the 


configuration-space which, although large (in every dimension) in relation to 
the wave length, is small in relation to the practical dimensions of the 
configuration-space. Under these conditions it is possible to choose a function 
of 4 for an initial time tọ in such a manner that it vanishes outside of the 


region Gp, and behaves, according to the Schrödinger equation, in such a 


manner that it retains this property—approximately at least—also for a later 
time, but with the region Gp having passed at that time ¢ into another region 


G. In this manner one can, with a certain degree of approximation, speak of 
the motion of the region G as a whole, and one can approximate this motion 
by the motion of a point in the configuration-space. This motion then 
coincides with the motion which is required by the equations of classical 
mechanics. 

Experiments on interference made with particle rays have given a brilliant 
proof that the wave character of phenomena of motion as assumed by the 
theory does, really, correspond to the facts. In addition to this, the theory 
succeeded, easily, in demonstrating the statistical laws of the transition of a 
system from one quantum condition to another under the action of external 
forces, which, from the standpoint of classical mechanics, appears as a 
miracle. The external forces were here represented by small additions of the 
potential energy as functions of the time. Now, while in classical mechanics, 
such additions can produce only correspondingly small alterations of the 
system, in the quantum mechanics they produce alterations of any magnitude 
however large, but with correspondingly small probability, a consequence in 
perfect harmony with experience. Even an understanding of the laws of 
radioactive decomposition, at least in their broad lines, was provided by the 
theory. 

Probably never before has a theory been evolved which has given a key to 
the interpretation and calculation of such a heterogeneous group of 
phenomena of experience as has the quantum theory. In spite of this, 
however, I believe that the theory is apt to beguile us into error in our search 
for a uniform basis for physics, because, in my belief, it is an incomplete 
representation of real things, although it is the only one which can be built out 


35 


of the fundamental concepts of force and material points (quantum 
corrections to classical mechanics). The incompleteness of the representation 
is the outcome of the statistical nature (incompleteness) of the laws. I will 
now justify this opinion. 

I ask first: How far does the 4 function describe a real condition of a 
mechanical system? Let us assume the y, to be the periodic solutions (put in 
the order of increasing energy values) of the Schrödinger equation. I shall 
leave open, for the time being, the question as to how far the individual ẹ, are 
complete descriptions of physical conditions. A system is first in the condition 
4, of lowest energy €; Then during a finite time a small disturbing force acts 


upon the system. At a later instant one obtains then from the Schrödinger 
equation a 4 function of the form 


$ =2c,4, 


where the c, are (complex) constants. If the 4, are “normalized,” then Icj| is 
nearly equal to 1, lcl etc. is small compared with 1. One may now ask: Does 
4 describe a real condition of the system? If the answer is yes, then we can 


hardly do otherwise than ascribe‘ to this condition a definite energy £, and, in 
particular, such an energy as exceeds €, by a small amount (in any case £} € 


€5). Such an assumption is, however, at variance with the experiments on 


electron impact such as have been made by J. Franck and G. Hertz, if, in 
addition to this, one accepts Millikan's demonstration of the discrete nature 
of electricity. As a matter of fact, these experiments lead to the conclusion 
that energy values of a state lying between the quantum values do not exist. 
From this it follows that our function # does not in any way describe a 
homogeneous condition of the body, but represents rather a statistical 
description in which the c, represent probabilities of the individual energy 


values. It seems to be clear, therefore, that the Born statistical interpretation 
of the quantum theory is the only possible one. The ẹ function does not in 
any way describe a condition which could be that of a single system; it relates 
rather to many systems, to “an ensemble of systems” in the sense of statistical 
mechanics. If, except for certain special cases, the 4 function furnishes only 


36 


statistical data concerning measurable magnitudes, the reason lies not only in 
the fact that the operation of measuring introduces unknown elements, which 
can be grasped only statistically, but because of the very fact that the 4 
function does not, in any sense, describe the condition of one single system. 
The Schrödinger equation determines the time variations which are 
experienced by the ensemble of systems which may exist with or without 
external action on the single system. 

Such an interpretation eliminates also the paradox recently demonstrated 
by myself and two collaborators, and which relates to the following problem. 

Consider a mechanical system constituted of two partial systems A and B 
which have interaction with each other only during limited time. Let the 4 
function before their interaction be given. Then the Schrödinger equation will 
furnish the 4 function after the interaction has taken place. Let us now 
determine the physical condition of the partial system A as completely as 
possible by measurements. Then the quantum mechanics allows us to 
determine the 4 function of the partial system B from the measurements 
made, and from the 4 function of the total system. This determination, 
however, gives a result which depends upon which of the determining 
magnitudes specifying the condition of A has been measured (for instance 
coordinates or momenta). Since there can be only one physical condition of B 
after the interaction and which can reasonably not be considered as dependent 
on the particular measurement we perform on the system A separated from B 
it may be concluded that the 4 function is not unambiguously coordinated 
with the physical condition. This co-ordination of several 4 functions with the 
same physical condition of system B shows again that the 4 function cannot 
be interpreted as a (complete) description of a physical condition of a unit 
system. Here also the coordination of the $ function to an ensemble of 
systems eliminates every difficulty. 

The fact that quantum mechanics affords, in such a simple manner, 
statements concerning (apparently) discontinuous transitions from one total 
condition to another without actually giving a representation of the specific 
process, this fact is connected with another, namely the fact that the theory, in 
reality, does not operate with the single system, but with a totality of systems. 
The coefficients c, of our first example are really altered very little under the 


action of the external force. With this interpretation of quantum mechanics 


37 


one can understand why this theory can easily account for the fact that weak 
disturbing forces are able to produce alterations of any magnitude in the 
physical condition of a system. Such disturbing forces produce, indeed, only 
correspondingly small alterations of the statistical density in the ensemble of 
systems, and hence only infinitely weak alterations of the ẹ functions, the 
mathematical description of which offers far less difficulty than would be 
involved in the mathematical representation of finite alterations experienced 
by part of the single systems. What happens to the single system remains, it is 
true, entirely unclarified by this mode of consideration; this enigmatic 
happening is entirely eliminated from the representation by the statistical 
manner of consideration. 

But now I ask: Is there really any physicist who believes that we shall never 
get any inside view of these important alterations in the single systems, in 
their structure and their causal connections, and this regardless of the fact that 
these single happenings have been brought so close to us, thanks to the 
marvelous inventions of the Wilson chamber and the Geiger counter? To 
believe this is logically possible without contradiction; but, it is so very 
contrary to my scientific instinct that I cannot forego the search for a more 
complete conception. 

To these considerations we should add those of another kind which also 
voice their plea against the idea that the methods introduced by quantum 
mechanics are likely to give a useful basis for the whole of physics. In the 
Schrödinger equation, absolute time, and also the potential energy, play a 
decisive role, while these two concepts have been recognized by the theory of 
relativity as inadmissible in principle. If one wishes to escape from this 
difficulty he must found the theory upon field and field laws instead of upon 
forces of interaction. This leads us to transpose the statistical methods of 
quantum mechanics to fields, that is to systems of infinitely many degrees of 
freedom. Although the attempts so far made are restricted to linear equations, 
which, as we know from the results of the general theory of relativity, are 
insufficient, the complications met up to now by the very ingenious attempts 
are already terrifying. They certainly will rise sky high if one wishes to obey 
the requirements of the general theory of relativity, the justification of which 
in principle nobody doubts. 

To be sure, it has been pointed out that the introduction of a space-time 
continuum may be considered as contrary to nature in view of the molecular 


38 


structure of everything which happens on a small scale. It is maintained that 
perhaps the success of the Heisenberg method points to a purely algebraical 
method of description of nature, that is to the elimination of continuous 
functions from physics. Then, however, we must also give up, by principle, 
the space-time continuum. It is not unimaginable that human ingenuity will 
some day find methods which will make it possible to proceed along such a 
path. At the present time, however, such a program looks like an attempt to 
breathe in empty space. 

There is no doubt that quantum mechanics has seized hold of a beautiful 
element of truth, and that it will be a test stone for any future theoretical 
basis, in that it must be deducible as a limiting case from that basis, just as 
electrostatics is deducible from the Maxwell equations of the electromagnetic 
field or as thermodynamics is deducible from classical mechanics. However, I 
do not believe that quantum mechanics will be the starting point in the search 
for this basis, just as, vice versa, one could not go from thermodynamics 
(resp. statistical mechanics) to the foundations of mechanics. 

In view of this situation, it seems to be entirely justifiable seriously to 
consider the question as to whether the basis of field physics cannot by any 
means be put into harmony with the facts of the quantum theory. Is this not 
the only basis which, consistently with today’s possibility of mathematical 
expression, can be adapted to the requirements of the general theory of 
relativity? The belief, prevailing among the physicists of today, that such an 
attempt would be hopeless, may have its root in the unjustifiable idea that 
such a theory should lead, as a first approximation, to the equations of 
classical mechanics for the motion of corpuscles, or at least to total 
differential equations. As a matter of fact up to now we have never succeeded 
in representing corpuscles theoretically by fields free of singularities, and we 
can, a priori, say nothing about the behavior of such entities. One thing, 
however, is certain: if a field theory results in a representation of corpuscles 
free of singularities, then the behavior of these corpuscles with time is 
determined solely by the differential equations of the field. 


§6. Relativity Theory and Corpuscles 





39 


I shall now show that, according to the general theory of relativity, there exist 
singularity-free solutions of field equations which can be interpreted as 
representing corpuscles. I restrict myself here to neutral particles because, in 
another recent publication in collaboration with Dr. Rosen, I have treated this 
question in a detailed manner, and because the essentials of the problem can 
be completely shown by this case. 

The gravitational field is entirely described by the tensor g„y In the three- 


index symbols I',,o, there appear also the contravariants g, which are 
defined as the minors of the gy divided by the determinant g(=Ilgal). In 
order that the R;, shall be defined and finite, it is not sufficient that there shall 


be, for the environment of every part of the continuum, a system of 
coordinates in which the g, and their first differential quotients are 


continuous and differentiable, but it is also necessary that the determinant g 
shall nowhere vanish. This last restriction is, however, eliminated if one 
replaces the differential equations Riy = 0 by g’R,, = 0, the left hand sides of 
which are whole rational functions of the g;, and of their derivatives. 


These equations have the centrally symmetrical solutions indicated by 
Schwarzschild 


1 l 
ds? = — — gpt — Pde + sinode’) +(1 ae at? 


This solution has a singularity at r = 2m, since the coefficient of dr? (i.e. g,)), 


becomes infinite on this hypersurface. If, however, we replace the variable r 
by p defined by the equation 


p = r— 2m 
we obtain 
ds? = — 4(2m + ọ°)dọ? — (2m + p°)’ (d0? + sin?0dg?) 


2m + p? ad 


40 


This solution behaves regularly for all values of p. The vanishing of the 
coefficient of df i.e. (g44) for p = O results, it is true, in the consequence that 


the determinant g vanishes for this value; but, with the methods of writing the 
field equations actually adopted, this does not constitute a singularity. 

If p extends from —oo to +00, then r runs from +00 to r = 2m and then back 
to +œ, while for such values of r as correspond to r 2m there are no 
corresponding real values of p. Hence the Schwarzschild solution becomes a 
regular solution by representation of the physical space as consisting of two 
identical “shells” neighboring upon the hypersurface p = 0, that is r = 2m, 
while for this hypersurface the determinant g vanishes. Let us call such a 
connection between the two (identical) shells a “bridge.” Hence the existence 
of such a bridge between the two shells in the finite realm corresponds to the 
existence of a material neutral particle which is described in a manner free 
from singularities. 

The solution of the problem of the motion of neutral particles evidently 
amounts to the discovery of such solutions of the gravitational equations 
(written free of denominators), as contain several bridges. 

The conception sketched above corresponds, a priori, to the atomistic 
structure of matter insofar as the “bridge” is by its nature a discrete element. 
Moreover, we see that the mass constant m of the neutral particles must 
necessarily be positive, since no solution free of singularities can correspond 
to the Schwarzschild solution for a negative value of m. Only the examination 
of the several-bridge-problem, can show whether or not this theoretical 
method furnishes an explanation of the empirically demonstrated equality of 
the masses of the particles found in nature, and whether it takes into account 
the facts which the quantum mechanics has so wonderfully comprehended. 

In an analogous manner, it is possible to demonstrate that the combined 
equations of gravitation and electricity (with appropriate choice of the sign of 
the electrical member in the gravitational equations) produce a singularity- 
free bridge-representation of the electric corpuscle. The simplest solution of 
this kind is that for an electrical particle without gravitational mass. 

So long as the important mathematical difficulties concerned with the 
solution of the several-bridge-problem, are not overcome, nothing can be said 
concerning the usefulness of the theory from the physicist’s point of view. 
However, it constitutes, as a matter of fact, the first attempt towards the 


41 


consistent elaboration of a field theory which presents a possibility of 
explaining the properties of matter. In favor of this attempt one should also 
add that it is based on the simplest possible relativistic field equations known 
today. 


Summary, 


Physics constitutes a logical system of thought which is in a state of evolution, 
and whose basis cannot be obtained through distillation by any inductive 
method from the experiences lived through, but which can only be attained by 
free invention. The justification (truth content) of the system rests in the 
proof of usefulness of the resulting theorems on the basis of sense 
experiences, where the relations of the latter to the former can only be 
comprehended intuitively. Evolution is going on in the direction of increasing 
simplicity of the logical basis. In order further to approach this goal, we must 
make up our mind to accept the fact that the logical basis departs more and 
more from the facts of experience, and that the path of our thought from the 
fundamental basis to these resulting theorems, which correlate with sense 
experiences, becomes continually harder and longer. 

Our aim has been to sketch, as briefly as possible, the development of the 
fundamental concepts in their dependence upon the facts of experience and 
upon the strife towards the goal of internal perfection of the system. Today’s 
state of affairs had to be illuminated by these considerations, as they appear to 
me. (It is unavoidable that historic schematic representation is of a personal 
color.) 

I try to demonstrate how the concepts of bodily objects, space, subjective 
and objective time, are connected with one another and with the nature of the 
experience. In classical mechanics the concepts of space and time become 
independent. The concept of the bodily object is replaced in the foundations 
by the concept of the material point, by which means mechanics becomes 
fundamentally atomistic. Light and electricity produce insurmountable 
difficulties when one attempts to make mechanics the basis of all physics. We 
are thus led to the field theory of electricity, and, later on to the attempt to 
base physics entirely upon the concept of the field (after an attempted 
compromise with classical mechanics). This attempt leads to the theory of 


42 


relativity (evolution of the notion of space and time into that of the 
continuum with metric structure). 

I try to demonstrate, furthermore, why in my opinion the quantum theory 
does not seem likely to be able to produce a usable foundation for physics: 
one becomes involved in contradictions if one tries to consider the theoretical 
quantum description as a complete description of the individual physical 
system or happening. 

On the other hand, up to the present time, the field theory is unable to give 
an explanation of the molecular structure of matter and of quantum 
phenomena. It is shown, however, that the conviction to the effect that the 
field theory is unable to give, by its methods, a solution of these problems 
rests upon prejudice. 


1 Tt is in the nature of things that we are able to talk about these objects only by means of concepts 
of our own creation, concepts which themselves are not subject to definition. It is essential, however, 
that we make use only of such concepts concerning whose coordination to our experience we feel no 
doubt. 


2 This defect of the theory could only be eliminated by such a formulation of mechanics as would 
command validity for all Bọ. This is one of the steps which lead to the general theory of relativity. A 


second defect, also eliminated only by the introduction of the general theory of relativity, lies in the fact 
that there is no reason given by mechanics itself for the equality of the gravitational and inertial mass of 
the material point. 


3 «J make no hypotheses.” 


: Because, according to a well established consequence of the relativity theory, the energy of a 
complete system (at rest) is equal to its inertia (as a whole). This, however, must have a well defined 
value. 


> The operation of measuring A, for example, thus involves a transition to a narrower ensemble of 
systems. The latter (hence also its Y function) depends upon the point of view according to which this 
narrowing of the ensemble of systems is made. 


43 


4. The Fundamentals of Theoretical Physics 


SCIENCE IS THE ATTEMPT to make the chaotic diversity of our sense-experience 
correspond to a logically uniform system of thought. In this system single 
experiences must be correlated with the theoretic structure in such a way that 
the resulting coordination is unique and convincing. 

The sense-experiences are the given subject-matter. But the theory that 
shall interpret them is man-made. It is the result of an extremely laborious 
process of adaptation: hypothetical, never completely final, always subject to 
question and doubt. 

The scientific way of forming concepts differs from that which we use in 
our daily life, not basically, but merely in the more precise definition of 
concepts and conclusions; more painstaking and systematic choice of 
experimental material; and greater logical economy. By this last we mean the 
effort to reduce all concepts and correlations to as few as possible logically 
independent basic concepts and axioms. 

What we call physics comprises that group of natural sciences which base 
their concepts on measurements; and whose concepts and propositions lend 
themselves to mathematical formulation. Its realm is accordingly defined as 
that part of the sum total of our knowledge which is capable of being 
expressed in mathematical terms. With the progress of science, the realm of 
physics has so expanded that it seems to be limited only by the limitations of 
the method itself. 

The larger part of physical research is devoted to the development of the 
various branches of physics, in each of which the object is the theoretical 
understanding of more or less restricted fields of experience, and in each of 
which the laws and concepts remain as closely as possible related to 
experience. It is this department of science, with its ever-growing 
specialization, which has revolutionized practical life in the last centuries, and 
given birth to the possibility that man may at last be freed from the burden of 
physical toil. 

On the other hand, from the very beginning there has always been present 
the attempt to find a unifying theoretical basis for all these single sciences, 
consisting of a minimum of concepts and fundamental relationships, from 


44 


which all the concepts and relationships of the single disciplines might be 
derived by logical process. This is what we mean by the search for a 
foundation of the whole of physics. The confident belief that this ultimate 
goal may be reached is the chief source of the passionate devotion which has 
always animated the researcher. It is in this sense that the following 
observations are devoted to the foundations of physics. 

From what has been said it is clear that the word foundations in this 
connection does not mean something analogous in all respects to the 
foundations of a building. Logically considered, of course, the various single 
laws of physics rest upon this foundation. But whereas a building may be 
seriously damaged by a heavy storm or spring flood, yet its foundations 
remain intact, in science the logical foundation is always in greater peril from 
new experiences or new knowledge than are the branch disciplines with their 
closer experimental contacts. In the connection of the foundation with all the 
single parts lies its great significance, but likewise its greatest danger in face 
of any new factor. When we realize this, we are led to wonder why the so- 
called revolutionary epochs of the science of physics have not more often and 
more completely changed its foundation than has actually been the case. 

The first attempt to lay a uniform theoretical foundation was the work of 
Newton. In his system everything is reduced to the following concepts: (1) 
Mass points with invariable mass; (2) action at a distance between any pair of 
mass points; (3) law of motion for the mass point. There was not, strictly 
speaking, any all-embracing foundation, because an explicit law was 
formulated only for the actions-at-a-distance of gravitation; while for other 
actions-at-a-distance nothing was established a priori except the law of 
equality of actio and reactio. Moreover, Newton himself fully realized that 
time and space were essential elements, as physically effective factors, of his 
system, if only by implication. 

This Newtonian basis proved eminently fruitful and was regarded as final 
up to the end of the nineteenth century. It not only gave results for the 
movements of the heavenly bodies, down to the most minute details, but also 
furnished a theory of the mechanics of discrete and continuous masses, a 
simple explanation of the principle of the conservation of energy and a 
complete and brilliant theory of heat. The explanation of the facts of 
electrodynamics within the Newtonian system was more forced; least 
convincing of all, from the very beginning, was the theory of light. 


45 


It is not surprising that Newton would not listen to a wave theory of light; 
for such a theory was most unsuited to his theoretical foundation. The 
assumption that space was filled with a medium consisting of material points 
that propagated light waves without exhibiting any other mechanical 
properties must have seemed to him quite artificial. The strongest empirical 
arguments for the wave nature of light, fixed speeds of propagation, 
interference, diffraction, polarization, were either unknown or else not known 
in any well-ordered synthesis. He was justified in sticking to his corpuscular 
theory of light. 

During the nineteenth century the dispute was settled in favor of the wave 
theory. Yet no serious doubt of the mechanical foundation of physics arose, in 
the first place because nobody knew where to find a foundation of another 
sort. Only slowly, under the irresistible pressure of facts, there developed a 
new foundation of physics, field-physics. 

From Newton’s time on, the theory of action-at-a-distance was constantly 
found artificial. Efforts were not lacking to explain gravitation by a kinetic 
theory, that is, on the basis of collision forces of hypothetical mass particles. 
But the attempts were superficial and bore no fruit. The strange part played 
by space (or the inertial system) within the mechanical foundation was also 
clearly recognized, and criticized with especial clarity by Ernst Mach. 

The great change was brought about by Faraday, Maxwell and Hertz—as a 
matter of fact half-unconsciously and against their will. All three of them, 
throughout their lives, considered themselves adherents of the mechanical 
theory. Hertz had found the simplest form of the equations of the 
electromagnetic field, and declared that any theory leading to these equations 
was Maxwellian theory. Yet toward the end of his short life he wrote a paper 
in which he presented as the foundation of physics a mechanical theory freed 
from the force-concept. 

For us, who took in Faraday’s ideas so to speak with our mother’s milk, it 
is hard to appreciate their greatness and audacity. Faraday must have grasped 
with unerring instinct the artificial nature of all attempts to refer 
electromagnetic phenomena to actions-at-a-distance between electric particles 
reacting on each other. How was each single iron filing among a lot scattered 
on a piece of paper to know of the single electric particles running round in a 
nearby conductor? All these electric particles together seemed to create in the 
surrounding space a condition which in turn produced a certain order in the 


46 


filings. These spatial states, to-day called fields, if their geometrical structure 
and interdependent action were once rightly grasped, would, he was 
convinced, furnish the clue to the mysterious electromagnetic interactions. He 
conceived these fields as states of mechanical stress in a space-filling medium, 
similar to the states of stress in an elastically distended body. For at that time 
this was the only way one could conceive of states that were apparently 
continuously distributed in space. The peculiar type of mechanical 
interpretation of these fields remained in the background—a sort of placation 
of the scientific conscience in view of the mechanical tradition of Faraday’s 
time. With the help of these new field concepts Faraday succeeded in forming 
a qualitative concept of the whole complex of electromagnetic effects 
discovered by him and his predecessors. The precise formulation of the time- 
space laws of those fields was the work of Maxwell. Imagine his feelings 
when the differential equations he had formulated proved to him that 
electromagnetic fields spread in the form of polarized waves and with the 
speed of light! To few men in the world has such an experience been 
vouchsafed. At that thrilling moment he surely never guessed that the riddling 
nature of light, apparently so completely solved, would continue to baffle 
succeeding generations. Meantime, it took physicists some decades to grasp 
the full significance of Maxwell’s discovery, so bold was the leap that his 
genius forced upon the conceptions of his fellow-workers. Only after Hertz 
had demonstrated experimentally the existence of Maxwell’s electromagnetic 
waves, did resistance to the new theory break down. 

But if the electromagnetic field could exist as a wave independent of the 
material source, then the electrostatic interaction could no longer be 
explained as action-at-a-distance. And what was true for electrical action 
could not be denied for gravitation. Everywhere Newtons actions-at-a- 
distance gave way to fields spreading with finite velocity. 

Of Newton’s foundation there now remained only the material mass points 
subject to the law of motion. But J. J. Thomson pointed out that an 
electrically charged body in motion must, according to Maxwell’s theory, 
possess a magnetic field whose energy acted precisely as does an increase of 
kinetic energy to the body. If, then, a part of kinetic energy consists of field 
energy, might that not then be true of the whole of the kinetic energy? 
Perhaps the basic property of matter, its inertia, could be explained within the 
field theory? The question led to the problem of an interpretation of matter in 


47 


terms of field theory, the solution of which would furnish an explanation of 
the atomic structure of matter. It was soon realized that Maxwell’s theory 
could not accomplish such a program. Since then many scientists have 
zealously sought to complete the field theory by some generalization that 
should comprise a theory of matter; but so far such efforts have not been 
crowned with success. In order to construct a theory, it is not enough to have 
a clear conception of the goal. One must also have a formal point of view 
which will sufficiently restrict the unlimited variety of possibilities. So far this 
has not been found; accordingly the field theory has not succeeded in 
furnishing a foundation for the whole of physics. 

For several decades most physicists clung to the conviction that a 
mechanical substructure would be found for Maxwell’s theory. But the 
unsatisfactory results of their efforts led to gradual acceptance of the new 
field concepts as irreducible fundamentals—in other words, physicists 
resigned themselves to giving up the idea of a mechanical foundation. 

Thus physicists held to a field-theory program. But it could not be called a 
foundation, since nobody could tell whether a consistent field theory could 
ever explain on the one hand gravitation, on the other hand the elementary 
components of matter. In this state of affairs it was necessary to think of 
material particles as mass points subject to Newton’s laws of motion. This 
was the procedure of Lorentz in creating his electron theory and the theory of 
the electromagnetic phenomena of moving bodies. 

Such was the point at which fundamental conceptions had arrived at the 
turn of the century. Immense progress was made in the theoretical 
penetration and understanding of whole groups of new phenomena; but the 
establishment of a unified foundation for physics seemed remote indeed. And 
this state of things has even been aggravated by subsequent developments. 
The development during the present century is characterized by two 
theoretical systems essentially independent of each other: the theory of 
relativity and the quantum theory. The two systems do not directly contradict 
each other; but they seem little adapted to fusion into one unified theory. We 
must briefly discuss the basic idea of these two systems. 

The theory of relativity arose out of efforts to improve, with reference to 
logical economy, the foundation of physics as it existed at the turn of the 
century. The so-called special or restricted relativity theory is based on the 
fact that Maxwell’s equations (and thus the law of propagation of light in 


48 


empty space) are converted into equations of the same form, when they 
undergo Lorentz transformation. This formal property of the Maxwell 
equations is supplemented by our fairly secure empirical knowledge that the 
laws of physics are the same with respect to all inertial systems. This leads to 
the result that the Lorentz transformation—applied to space and time 
coordinates—must govern the transition from one inertial system to any 
other. The content of the restricted relativity theory can accordingly be 
summarized in one sentence: all natural laws must be so conditioned that they 
are covariant with respect to Lorentz transformations. From this it follows 
that the simultaneity of two distant events is not an invariant concept and that 
the dimensions of rigid bodies and the speed of clocks depend upon their 
state of motion. A further consequence was a modification of Newton’s law 
of motion in cases where the speed of a given body was not small compared 
with the speed of light. There followed also the principle of the equivalence 
of mass and energy, with the laws of conservation of mass and energy 
becoming one and the same. Once it was shown that simultaneity was relative 
and depended on the frame of reference, every possibility of retaining 
actions-at-a-distance within the foundation of physics disappeared, since that 
concept presupposed the absolute character of simultaneity (it must be 
possible to state the location of the two interacting mass points “at the same 
time”). 

The general theory of relativity owes its origin to the attempt to explain a 
fact known since Galileo’s and Newton’s time but hitherto eluding all 
theoretical interpretation: the inertia and the weight of a body, in themselves 
two entirely distinct things, are measured by one and the same constant, the 
mass. From this correspondence follows that it is impossible to discover by 
experiment whether a given system of coordinates is accelerated, or whether 
its motion is straight and uniform and the observed effects are due to a 
gravitational field (this is the equivalence principle of the general relativity 
theory). It shatters the concepts of the inertial system, as soon as gravitation 
enters in. It may be remarked here that the inertial system is a weak point of 
the Galilean-Newtonian mechanics. For there is presupposed a mysterious 
property of physical space, conditioning the kind of coordination-systems for 
which the law of inertia and the Newtonian law of motion hold good. 

These difficulties can be avoided by the following postulate: natural laws 
are to be formulated in such a way that their form is identical for coordinate 


49 


systems of any kind of states of motion. To accomplish this is the task of the 
general theory of relativity. On the other hand, we deduce from the restricted 
theory the existence of a Riemannian metric within the time-space 
continuum, which, according to the equivalence principle, describes both the 
gravitational field and the metric properties of space. Assuming that the field 
equations of gravitation are of the second differential order, the field law is 
clearly determined. 

Aside from this result, the theory frees field physics from the disability it 
suffered from, in common with the Newtonian mechanics, of ascribing to 
space those independent physical properties which heretofore had been 
concealed by the use of an inertial system. But it can not be claimed that 
those parts of the general relativity theory which can to-day be regarded as 
final have furnished physics with a complete and satisfactory foundation. In 
the first place, the total field appears in it to be composed of two logically 
unconnected parts, the gravitational and the electromagnetic. And in the 
second place, this theory, like the earlier field theories, has not up till now 
supplied an explanation of the atomistic structure of matter. This failure has 
probably some connection with the fact that so far it has contributed nothing 
to the understanding of quantum phenomena. To take in these phenomena, 
physicists have been driven to the adoption of entirely new methods, the basic 
characteristics of which we shall now discuss. 

In the year nineteen hundred, in the course of a purely theoretic 
investigation, Max Planck made a very remarkable discovery: the law of 
radiation of bodies as a function of temperature could not be derived solely 
from the laws of Maxwellian electrodynamics. To arrive at results consistent 
with the relevant experiments, radiation of a given frequency had to be 
treated as though it consisted of energy atoms of the individual energy h.v., 
where h is Planck’s universal constant. During the years following it was 
shown that light was everywhere produced and absorbed in such energy 
quanta. In particular Niels Bohr was able largely to understand the structure 
of the atom, on the assumption that atoms can have only discrete energy 
values, and that the discontinuous transitions between them are connected 
with the emission or absorption of such an energy quantum. This threw some 
light on the fact that in their gaseous state elements and their compounds 
radiate and absorb only light of certain sharply defined frequencies. All this 
was quite inexplicable within the frame of the hitherto existing theories. It 


50 


was clear that at least in the field of atomistic phenomena the character of 
everything that happens is determined by discrete states and by apparently 
discontinuous transitions between them, Planck’s constant h playing a 
decisive role. 

The next step was taken by De Broglie. He asked himself how the discrete 
states could be understood by the aid of the current concepts, and hit on a 
parallel with stationary waves, as for instance in the case of the proper 
frequencies of organ pipes and strings in acoustics. True, wave actions of the 
kind here required were unknown; but they could be constructed, and their 
mathematical laws formulated, employing Planck’s constant h. De Broglie 
conceived an electron revolving about the atomic nucleus as being connected 
with such a hypothetical wave train, and made intelligible to some extent the 
discrete character of Bohr’s “permitted” paths by the stationary character of 
the corresponding waves. 

Now in mechanics the motion of material points is determined by the 
forces or fields of force acting upon them. Hence it was to be expected that 
those fields of force would also influence De Broglie’s wave fields in an 
analogous way. Erwin Schrödinger showed how this influence was to be taken 
into account, re-interpreting by an ingenious method certain formulations of 
classical mechanics. He even succeeded in expanding the wave mechanical 
theory to a point where without the introduction of any additional hypotheses, 
it became applicable to any mechanical system consisting of an arbitrary 
number of mass points, that is to say possessing an arbitrary number of 
degrees of freedom. This was possible because a mechanical system 
consisting of n mass points is mathematically equivalent to a considerable 
degree, to one single mass point moving in a space of 3 n dimensions. 

On the basis of this theory there was obtained a surprisingly good 
representation of an immense variety of facts which otherwise appeared 
entirely incomprehensible. But on one point, curiously enough, there was 
failure: it proved impossible to associate with these Schrödinger waves 
definite motions of the mass points—and that, after all, had been the original 
purpose of the whole construction. 

The difficulty appeared insurmountable, until it was overcome by Born in a 
way as simple as it was unexpected. The De Broglie-Schrédinger wave fields 
were not to be interpreted as a mathematical description of how an event 
actually takes place in time and space, though, of course, they have reference 


51 


to such an event. Rather they are a mathematical description of what we can 
actually know about the system. They serve only to make statistical 
statements and predictions of the results of all measurements which we can 
carry out upon the system. 

Let me illustrate these general features of quantum mechanics by means of 
a simple example: we shall consider a mass point kept inside a restricted 
region G by forces of finite strength. If the kinetic energy of the mass point is 
below a certain limit, then the mass point, according to classical mechanics, 
can never leave the region G. But according to quantum mechanics, the mass 
point, after a period not immediately predictable, is able to leave the region 
G, in an unpredictable direction, and escape into surrounding space. This 
case, according to Gamow, is a simplified model of radioactive disintegration. 

The quantum theoretical treatment of this case is as follows: at the time tO 
we have a Schrödinger wave system entirely inside G. But from the time tO 
onwards, the waves leave the interior of G in all directions, in such a way that 
the amplitude of the outgoing wave is small compared to the initial amplitude 
of the wave system inside G. The further these outside waves spread, the 
more the amplitude of the waves inside G diminishes, and correspondingly 
the intensity of the later waves issuing from G. Only after infinite time has 
passed is the wave supply inside G exhausted, while the outside wave has 
spread over an ever-increasing space. 

But what has this wave process to do with the first object of our interest, 
the particle originally enclosed in G? To answer this question, we must 
imagine some arrangement which will permit us to carry out measurements 
on the particle. For instance, let us imagine somewhere in the surrounding 
Space a screen so made that the particle sticks to it on coming into contact 
with it. Then from the intensity of the waves hitting the screen at some point, 
we draw conclusions as to the probability of the particle hitting the screen 
there at that time. As soon as the particle has hit any particular point of the 
screen, the whole wave field loses all its physical meaning; its only purpose 
was to make probability predictions as to the place and time of the particle 
hitting the screen (or, for instance, its momentum at the time when it hits the 
screen). 

All other cases are analogous. The aim of the theory is to determine the 
probability of the results of measurement upon a system at a given time. On 
the other hand, it makes no attempt to give a mathematical representation of 


52 


what is actually present or goes on in space and time. On this point the 
quantum theory of to-day differs fundamentally from all previous theories of 
physics, mechanistic as well as field theories. Instead of a model description 
of actual space-time events, it gives the probability distributions for possible 
measurements as functions of time. 

It must be admitted that the new theoretical conception owes its origin not 
to any flight of fancy but to the compelling force of the facts of experience. 
All attempts to represent the particle and wave features displayed in the 
phenomena of light and matter, by direct course to a space-time model, have 
so far ended in failure. And Heisenberg has convincingly shown, from an 
empirical point of view, any decision as to a rigorously deterministic structure 
of nature is definitely ruled out, because of the atomistic structure of our 
experimental apparatus. Thus it is probably out of the question that any future 
knowledge can compel physics again to relinquish our present statistical 
theoretical foundation in favor of a deterministic one which would deal 
directly with physical reality. Logically the problem seems to offer two 
possibilities, between which we are in principle given a choice. In the end the 
choice will be made according to which kind of description yields the 
formulation of the simplest foundation, logically speaking. At the present, we 
are quite without any deterministic theory directly describing the events 
themselves and in consonance with the facts. 

For the time being, we have to admit that we do not possess any general 
theoretical basis for physics, which can be regarded as its logical foundation. 
The field theory, so far, has failed in the molecular sphere. It is agreed on all 
hands that the only principle which could serve as the basis of quantum 
theory would be one that constituted a translation of the field theory into the 
scheme of quantum statistics. Whether this will actually come about in a 
satisfactory manner, nobody can venture to say. 

Some physicists, among them myself, can not believe that we must 
abandon, actually and forever, the idea of direct representation of physical 
reality in space and time; or that we must accept the view that events in 
nature are analogous to a game of chance. It is open to every man to choose 
the direction of his striving; and also every man may draw comfort from 
Lessing’s fine saying, that the search for truth is more precious than its 
possession. 


53 


5. The Common Language of Science 


THE FIRST STEP towards language was to link acoustically or otherwise 
commutable signs to sense-impressions. Most likely all sociable animals have 
arrived at this primitive kind of communication—at least to a certain degree. 
A higher development is reached when further signs are introduced and 
understood which establish relations between those other signs designating 
sense-impression. At this stage it is already possible to report somewhat 
complex series of impressions; we can say that language has come to 
existence. If language is to lead at all to understanding, there must be rules 
concerning the relations between the signs on the one hand and on the other 
hand there must be a stable correspondence between signs and impressions. In 
their childhood individuals connected by the same language grasp these rules 
and relations mainly by intuition. When man becomes conscious of the rules 
concerning the relations between signs the so-called grammar of language is 
established. 

In an early stage the words may correspond directly to impressions. At a 
later stage this direct connection is lost insofar as some words convey 
relations to perceptions only if used in connection with other words (for 
instance such words as: “i thing”). Then word-groups rather than 


2) 66. 


is,” “or, 
single words refer to perceptions. When language becomes thus partially 
independent from the background of impressions a greater inner coherence is 
gained. 

Only at this further development where frequent use is made of so-called 
abstract concepts, language becomes an instrument of reasoning in the true 
sense of the word. But it is also this development which turns language into a 
dangerous source of error and deception. Everything depends on the degree 
to which words and word-combinations correspond to the world of 
impression. 

What is it that brings about such an intimate connection between language 
and thinking? Is there no thinking without the use of language, namely in 
concepts and concept-combinations for which words need not necessarily 
come to mind? Has not everyone of us struggled for words although the 
connection between “things” was already clear? 


54 


We might be inclined to attribute to the act of thinking complete 
independence from language if the individual formed or were able to form his 
concepts without the verbal guidance of his environment. Yet most likely the 
mental shape of an individual, growing up under such conditions, would be 
very poor. Thus we may conclude that the mental development of the 
individual and his way of forming concepts depend to a high degree upon 
language. This makes us realize to what extent the same language means the 
same mentality. In this sense thinking and language are linked together. 

What distinguishes the language of science from language as we ordinarily 
understand the word? How is it that scientific language is international? What 
science strives for is an utmost acuteness and clarity of concepts as regards 
their mutual relation and their correspondence to sensory data. As an 
illustration let us take the language of Euclidian geometry and Algebra. They 
manipulate with a small number of independently introduced concepts, 
respectively symbols, such as the integral number, the straight line, the point, 
as well as with signs which designate the fundamental operations, that is the 
connections between those fundamental concepts. This is the basis for the 
construction, respectively definition of all other statements and concepts. The 
connection between concepts and statements on the one hand and the sensory 
data on the other hand is established through acts of counting and measuring 
whose performance is sufficiently well determined. 

The super-national character of scientific concepts and scientific language 
is due to the fact that they have been set up by the best brains of all countries 
and all times. In solitude and yet in cooperative effort as regards the final 
effect they created the spiritual tools for the technical revolutions which have 
transformed the life of mankind in the last centuries. Their system of 
concepts have served as a guide in the bewildering chaos of perceptions so 
that we learned to grasp general truths from particular observations. 

What hopes and fears does the scientific method imply for mankind? I do 
not think that this is the right way to put the question. Whatever this tool in 
the hand of man will produce depends entirely on the nature of the goals alive 
in this mankind. Once these goals exist, the scientific method furnishes means 
to realize them. Yet it cannot furnish the very goals. The scientific method 
itself would not have led anywhere, it would not even have been born without 
a passionate striving for clear understanding. 


55 


Perfections of means and confusion of goals seem—in my opinion—to 
characterize our age. If we desire sincerely and passionately the safety, the 
welfare and the free development of the talents of all men, we shall not be in 
want of the means to approach such a state. Even if only a small part of 
mankind strives for such goals, their superiority will prove itself in the long 
run. 


56 


6. The Laws of Science and the Laws of Ethics 


SCIENCE SEARCHES FOR RELATIONS which are thought to exist independently of 
the searching individual. This includes the case where man himself is the 
subject. Or the subject of scientific statements may be concepts created by 
ourselves, as in mathematics. Such concepts are not necessarily supposed to 
correspond to any objects in the outside world. However, all scientific 
statements and laws have one characteristic in common: they are “true or 
false” (adequate or inadequate). Roughly speaking, our reaction to them is 
“yes” or “no.” 

The scientific way of thinking has a further characteristic. The concepts 
which it uses to build up its coherent systems are not expressing emotions. 
For the scientist, there is only “being,” but no wishing, no valuing, no good, 
no evil; no goal. As long as we remain within the realm of science proper, we 
can never meet with a sentence of the type: “Thou shalt not lie.” There is 
something like a Puritan’s restraint in the scientist who seeks truth: he keeps 
away from everything voluntaristic or emotional. Incidentally, this trait is the 
result of a slow development, peculiar to modern Western thought. 

From this it might seem as if logical thinking were irrelevant for ethics. 
Scientific statements of facts and relations, indeed, cannot produce ethical 
directives. However, ethical directives can be made rational and coherent by 
logical thinking and empirical knowledge. If we can agree on some 
fundamental ethical propositions, then other ethical propositions can be 
derived from them, provided that the original premises are stated with 
sufficient precision. Such ethical premises play a similar role in ethics, to that 
played by axioms in mathematics. 

This is why we do not feel at all that it is meaningless to ask such questions 
as: “Why should we not lie?” We feel that such questions are meaningful 
because in all discussions of this kind some ethical premises are tacitly taken 
for granted. We then feel satisfied when we succeed in tracing back the 
ethical directive in question to these basic premises. In the case of lying this 
might perhaps be done in some way such as this: Lying destroys confidence in 
the statements of other people. Without such confidence, social cooperation is 
made impossible or at least difficult. Such cooperation, however, is essential 


57 


to make human life possible and tolerable. This means that the rule “Thou 
shalt not lie” has been traced back to the demands: “Human life shall be 
preserved” and “Pain and sorrow shall be lessened as much as possible.” 

But what is the origin of such ethical axioms? Are they arbitrary? Are they 
based on mere authority? Do they stem from experiences of men and are they 
conditioned indirectly by such experiences? 

For pure logic all axioms are arbitrary, including the axioms of ethics. But 
they are by no means arbitrary from a psychological and genetic point of 
view. They are derived from our inborn tendencies to avoid pain and 
annihilation, and from the accumulated emotional reaction of individuals to 
the behavior of their neighbors. 

It is the privilege of man’s moral genius, impersonated by inspired 
individuals, to advance ethical axioms which are so comprehensive and so 
well founded that men will accept them as grounded in the vast mass of their 
individual emotional experiences. Ethical axioms are found and tested not 
very differently from the axioms of science. Truth is what stands the test of 
experience. 


58 


7. An Elementary Derivation of the Equivalence 
of Mass and Energy 


THE FOLLOWING DERIVATION of the law of equivalence, which has not been 
published before, has two advantages. Although it makes use of the principle 
of special relativity, it does not presume the formal machinery of the theory 
but uses only three previously known laws: 

(1) The law of the conservation of momentum. 

(2) The expression for the pressure of radiation; that is, the momentum of 
a complex of radiation moving in a fixed direction. 

(3) The well known expression for the aberration of light (influence of the 
motion of the earth on the apparent location of the fixed stars—Bradley). 

We now consider the following system. Let the body B rest freely in space 
with respect to the system Ko. Two 





complexes of radiation S, S’ each of energy E move in the positive and 


negative Xq direction respectively and are eventually absorbed by B. With this 
absorption the energy of B increases by E. The body B stays at rest with 


respect to Ky by reasons of symmetry. 
—s g w a 
£ 2 


2c 2c 


59 


Now we consider this same process with respect to the system K, which 
moves with respect to Kọ with the constant velocity v in the negative Zp 


direction. With respect to K the description of the process is as follows: 
v 
iz ON 


The body B moves in the positive Z direction with velocity v. The two 
complexes of radiation now have directions with respect to K which make an 
angle a with the x axis. The law of aberration states that in the first 





approximation «= <, where c is the velocity of light. From the consideration 
with respect to Ky we know that the velocity v of B remains unchanged by the 
absorption of S and S’. 


# 


Now we apply the law of conservation of momentum with respect to the z 
direction to our system in the coordinate-frame K. 

I. Before the absorption let M be the mass of B; Mv is then the expression 
of the momentum of B (according to classical mechanics). Each of the 


complexes has the energy : and hence, by a well known conclusion of 
, , a each 
Maxwell's theory, it has the momentum Dc: Rigorously speaking this is the 
momentum of S with respect to Kọ. However, when v is small with respect to 
c, the momentum with respect to K is the same except for a quantity of 


second order of magnitude G compared to 1). The z-component of this 


= SED i ; ; Sis 
momentum is 5- sin a or with sufficient accuracy (except for quantities of 


higher order of magnitude) = we 


z` 5 S and S’ together therefore have a 


60 


momentum ES in the z direction. The total momentum of the system before 


absorption is therefore 
Mv + Ls ‘Vv 
C 


Il. After the absorption let M’ be the mass of B. We anticipate here the 
possibility that the mass increased with the absorption of the energy E (this is 
necessary so that the final result of our consideration be consistent). The 
momentum of the system after absorption is then 


M’v 


We now assume the law of the conservation of momentum and apply it 
with respect to the z direction. This gives the equation 


Mv + =v=MYy 
c 


or 


TRTE 
c 


This equation expresses the law of the equivalence of energy and mass. 
The energy increase E is connected with the mass increase E . Since energy 


according to the usual definition leaves an additive constant free, we may so 
choose the latter that 


E = Mc? 


61 


A Biography of Albert Einstein 


Albert Einstein (1879-1955) is among modern history’s greatest and most 
influential minds. He authored more than 450 scholarly works during his 
lifetime, and his advancements in science—including the revolutionary 
Theory of Relativity and E=mc*, which described for the first time the 
relationship between an object’s mass and its energy—have earned him 
renown as “the father of modern physics.” 

Born in Ulm, in southwest Germany, Einstein moved to Munich with his 
family as an infant. As a child, Einstein spoke so infrequently that his parents 
feared he had a learning disability. But despite difficulties with speech, he was 
consistently a top student and showed an early aptitude for mathematics and 
physics, which he later studied at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in 
Zurich after renouncing his German citizenship to avoid military service in 
1896. 

After graduation, Einstein married his college girlfriend, Mileva Marić, 
and they had three children. He attended the University of Zurich for his 
doctorate and worked at the patent office in Bern, a post he left in 1908 for a 
teaching position at the University of Bern, followed by a number of 
professorships throughout Europe that ultimately led him back to Germany in 
1914. By this time, Einstein had already become recognized throughout the 
world for his groundbreaking papers on special relativity, the photoelectric 
effect, and the relationship between energy and matter. He won the Nobel 
Prize in Physics in 1921. 

In 1933, Einstein escaped Nazi Germany and immigrated to the United 
States with his second wife, Elsa Löwenthal, whom he had married in 1919. 
He accepted a position at Princeton University in New Jersey, where he 
stayed for the remainder of his life. At Princeton, Einstein dedicated himself 
to finding a unified field theory and played a key role in America’s 
development of atomic weapons. He also campaigned for civil rights as a 
member of the NAACP and was an ardent supporter of Israel’s Labor Zionist 
Movement. 

Stil, Einstein maintained a special affinity for his homeland. His 
connection to all things German and, in particular, to the scientific 


62 


community in Berlin was probably the reason that throughout his years in 
America he so strongly valued his relationships with other German-speaking 
immigrants. He maintained a deep friendship with the founder of 
Philosophical Library, Dr. Dagobert D. Runes, who, like Einstein, was a 
humanist, a civil rights pioneer, and an admirer of Baruch Spinoza. 
Consequently, many of Albert Einstein’s works were published by 
Philosophical Library. 

At the time of Einstein’s death in 1955, he was universally recognized as 
one of history’s most brilliant and important scientists. 





Einstein smoking a pipe on the porch of his home in Princeton, New Jersey, in 1938. He was a 
very ardent pipe smoker and treasured the ritual of selecting different tobaccos and preparing them to 
be smoked. 


63 





Einstein in 1938 with Thomas and Katia Mann, in Princeton, New Jersey. 


64 





Einstein with his friends poet Itzik Feffer and actor Solomon Mikhoels, in 1943. 


65 





TOW, Foust. Sonate ETA Bec Tacr. ger. 


Einstein in 1945 in the study of his Princeton home. 


66 





Einstein in his Princeton study on the day that he received his honorary degree from the Hebrew 
University of Jerusalem, in 1949. 


67 





Einstein receiving the honorary degree from Israel S. Wechsler while at his Princeton home in 
1949. 


68 





A photograph of Einstein in in the 1950s. 


69 





A portrait of Einstein at the Yeshiva University inauguration dinner for the Albert Einstein College 
of Medicine, at Princeton Inn on March 15, 1953. 


70 





A draft of a poem and some of Einstein’s calculations in his own hand. 


71 





An envelope Einstein used as scribbling paper. 


12 


Acknowledgments 


1. From The American People’s Encyclopedia, copyright by the Spencer 
Press, Inc., Chicago, 1949. 

2. From Science Illustrated; New York, April, 1946. 

3. From The Journal of the Franklin Institute, Vol. 221, No. 3; March. 
1936. 

4. From Science; Washington, D.C., May 24, 1940. 

5. A broadcast recording for the Science Conference; London, 
September 28, 1941, and published in Advancement of Science; 
London, Vol. 2, no. 5. 

6. From Relativity—A Richer Truth by Philipp Frank; published by the 
Beacon Press, Boston, 1950. 

7. From Technion Journal; New York, 1946. 


173 


All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright 
Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the 
non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text of this ebook 
onscreen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, downloaded, 
decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced into any 
information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means, 
whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented, 
without the express written permission of the publisher. 


Previously published under the title Essays in Physics by Philosophical 
Library. Published by agreement with Philosophical Library. 


copyright © 1950, 2010 by Philosophical Library, Inc. 
cover design by Milan Bozic 
ISBN: 978-1-4532-0472-6 


This 2011 edition distributed by Open Road Integrated Media 
180 Varick Street 

New York, NY 10014 

www.openroadmedia.com 


a) 


74 


