IMAGE  EVALUATION 
TEST  TARGET  (MT-3) 


^/ 


k 


:a 


J 


z 


K. 


1.0 


1.1 


us 


140 


I 


22 
2.0 


1^  WhL  116 


V 


Hiotographic 

Sciences 
Corpordlion 


23  WEST  MAIN  STREET 

WEBSTER,  N.Y.  14580 

(716)  872-4503 


m 


{\ 


N> 


A 


.V 


q\ 


%> 


'^f^ 


'<* 


^ 


"ik^ 


J  ; 


CIHM/ICMH 

Microfiche 

Series. 


CIHM/ICMH 
Collection  de 
microfiches. 


Canadian  institute  for  Historical  Microreproductions  /  Institut  Canadian  de  microreproductions  historiques 


m 


Technical  and  Bibliographic  Notes/Notes  techniques  et  biblioqraphiques 


The  Institute  has  attempted  to  obtain  the  best 
original  copy  available  for  filming.  Features  of  this 
copy  which  may  be  bibliographically  unique, 
which  may  alter  any  of  the  images  in  the 
reproduction,  or  which  ma/  significantly  change 
the  usi^al  method  of  filming,  are  checked  below. 


D 


D 
D 


D 


Coloured  covers/ 
Co'jverture  de  couleur 


I      I    Covers  damaged/ 


Couverture  endommagde 

Covers  restored  and/or  laminated/ 
Couverture  restaurde  et/ou  pellicul6e 

Cover  title  missing/ 

Le  titre  de  couverture  manque 

Coloured  maps/ 

Cartes  gdographiques  en  couleur 

Coloured  ink  (i.e.  other  than  blue  or  black)/ 
Encre  de  couleur  (i.e.  autre  que  bleue  ou  noire) 


I      I    Coloured  plates  and/or  illustrations/ 


Planches  et/ou  illustrations  en  couleur 

Bound  with  other  material/ 
Re\\6  avec  d'autres  documents 

Tight  binding  may  cause  shadows  or  distortion 
along  interior  margin/ 

La  reliure  serree  pdut  causer  de  I'ombre  ou  de  la 
distortion  le  long  de  la  marge  intdrieure 

Clank  leaves  added  during  restoration  may 
appear  within  the  text.  Whenever  possible,  these 
have  been  omitted  from  filming/ 
II  se  peut  que  ctrtaines  pages  blanches  ajoutdes 
lors  d'une  restauration  apparaissent  dans  le  texte, 
mais,  lorsque  cela  dtait  possible,  ces  pages  n'ont 
pas  6X6  filmdes. 


L'Institut  a  microfilm^  le  meilleur  exemplaire 
qu'il  lui  a  6t6  possible  de  se  procurer.  Les  details 
de  cet  exemplaire  qui  sont  peut-dtre  uniques  du 
point  de  vue  bibliographique,  qui  peuvent  modifier 
une  image  reproduite,  ou  qui  peuvent  exiger  une 
modification  dans  la  mdthode  normale  de  filmage 
sont  indiquds  ci-dessous. 


I      I    Coloured  pages/ 


Pages  de  couleur 

Pages  damaged/ 
Pages  endommagdes 

Pages  restored  and/oi 

Pages  restaurdes  et/ou  pelliculdes 

Pages  discoloured,  stained  or  foxe( 
Pages  d6color6es,  tachetdes  ou  piqudes 

Pages  detached/ 
Pages  d6tach6es 

Showthrough/ 
Transparence 

Quality  of  prir 

Quality  in4gale  de  rimpre»a»ion 

Includes  supplementary  matttrif 
Comprend  du  materiel  suppiementaire 

Only  edition  available/ 
Seule  Edition  disponible 


I  I  Pages  damaged/ 

I  I  Pages  restored  and/or  laminated/ 

I  T  Pages  discoloured,  stained  or  foxed/ 

I  I  Pages  detached/ 

r~~j  Showthrough/ 

I  I  Quality  of  print  varies/ 

I  I  Includes  supplementary  matttrial/ 

I  I  Only  edition  available/ 


D 


Pages  wholly  or  partially  obscured  by  errata 
slips,  tissues,  etc.,  have  been  refilmed  to 
ensure  the  best  possible  image/ 
Los  pages  totalement  ou  partiellement 
obscurcies  par  un  feuillet  d'errata,  une  pelure, 
etc.,  ont  6t^  filmdes  d  nouveau  de  faqon  d 
obtenir  la  meilleure  image  possible. 


y 


Additional  comments:/ 
Commentaires  suppl6mentaires: 


irregular  pagination  :  i  •  xiv,  17  •  18, 19  -  394, 1  •  32p. 


This  item  is  filmed  at  the  reduction  ratio  checked  below/ 

Ce  document  est  filmd  au  taux  de  reduction  indiqud  ci-dessous. 

10X  14X  18X  22X 


26X 


30X 


y 

12X 


16X 


20X 


24X 


28X 


32X 


i 

itails 
t  du 
odifier 
'  une 
mage 


rrata 
to 


pelure, 
1  h 


The  copy  filmed  here  hat  been  reproduced  thanks 
to  the  generosity  of: 

Mills  Mmnorial  Library 
McMaiter  Univ«t'sity 


The  images  appearing  here  are  the  best  quality 
possible  considering  the  condition  and  legibility 
of  the  original  copy  and  in  keeping  with  the 
filming  contract  specifications. 


Original  copies  in  printed  paper  covers  are  filmed 
beginning  with  the  front  cover  and  ending  on 
the  last  page  with  a  printed  or  illustrated  impres- 
sion, or  the  back  cover  when  appropriate.  All 
other  original  copies  are  filmed  beginning  on  the 
first  page  with  a  printed  or  illustrated  impres- 
sion, and  ending  on  the  last  page  with  a  printed 
or  illustrated  impression. 


The  last  recorded  frame  on  each  microfiche 
shall  contain  the  symbol  — ^-  (meaning  "COiV- 
TINUED"),  or  the  symbol  V  (meaning  "END"), 
whichever  applies. 

Maps,  plates,  charts,  etc.,  may  be  filmed  at 
different  reduction  ratios.  Those  too  large  to  be 
entirely  included  in  one  exposure  are  filmed 
beginning  in  the  upper  left  hand  corner,  left  to 
right  and  top  to  bottom,  as  many  frames  as 
required.  The  following  diagrams  illustrate  the 
method: 


1 

2 

3 

L'exemplaire  filmA  fut  reproduit  grAce  A  la 
g6n6rosit6  de: 

Milli  Memorial  Library 
McMastar  Univanity 

Les  images  suivantos  ont  AtA  reproduites  avec  le 
plus  grand  soin,  compte  tenu  de  la  condition  et 
de  la  nettet6  de  l'exemplaire  f  ilm«,  et  en 
conformity  avec  les  conditions  du  contrat  de 
filmage. 

Les  exemplaires  originaux  dont  la  couverture  en 
papier  est  imprimte  sont  fllmfo  an  commenpant 
par  le  premier  plat  et  en  terminant  soit  par  la 
derniAre  page  qui  comporte  une  empreinte 
d'impression  ou  d'iUustration,  soit  par  le  second 
plat,  selon  le  cas.  Tous  les  autres  exemplaires 
originaux  sont  filmte  en  commenpant  par  la 
premiere  page  qui  comporte  une  empreinte 
d'impression  ou  d'iUustration  et  en  terminant  par 
la  dernidre  page  qui  comporte  une  telle 
empreinte. 

Un  des  symboles  suivants  apparattra  sur  la 
dernidre  image  de  cheque  microfiche,  selon  le 
cas:  le  symbole  — ►  signif ie  "A  SUIVRE",  le 
symbols  V  signifie  "FIN". 

Les  cartes,  planches,  tableaux,  etc.,  peuvent  Atre 
filmAs  d  des  taux  de  rAducticn  diffArents. 
Lorsque  le  document  est  trop  grand  pour  dtre 
reproduit  en  un  seul  clichA,  11  est  film«  A  partir 
de  I'angle  supArieur  gauche,  de  gauche  A  droite. 
et  de  haut  en  bas,  en  prenant  le  nombre 
d'imagss  ndcessaire.  Les  diagrammes  suivants 
illustrent  la  mAthode. 


32X 


1 

2 

3 

4 

6 

6 

THE   STOUY  OF  OtrR  c 


OLONIES. 


s 


1 


if 


o 


1 


r* 


i 

I. 


r 


( 


(       O 


^     €-0 
O  \j3 


r- 


0: 


—  O 


-i-.  o 


-:i.  O 


. 


J  -i--  -^ 


i?!l^  ■ 


a 

« 

^- 

iB 

>! 

S 

.s 

■•r. 

^-   -   IM 


-    ,   It  ■;  2 


I    I 
,     ?5 


C    j^   '«' 


J. 

o 

to 


'•   0 

.■tf 


THE 


STORY  OF  OUPt  COLOi\IES. 


nv 


H.   R.  FOX   JJOURXE, 

.  AlTlKd!    OH' 

A  MKM..irt  OF  SlU  IMriLIl-  SI|,NKv  '  '  IHP    .  ,,  ,-      , 

WITH  SIX  iMAPS. 


TnrT^T     .  LONDON: 

JOHN    HOOG,     u,    PATERNOSTEK    ROW 

M/^  Jiiijhts  lienerved.} 


' 


McMASTEK  UIMIVEKblTY  LIBRARY 


PREFACE. 

Tu.  first  edition  cf  this  book  appeared  in  18C9  with  the 

o..n,prerator,  note:.  Perhaps  the  titie.^^^^^^^^^ 
Plams  >ta  purport.     Of  the  history  of  the  British  pole 

-cl;rt^r::^t^"^'r-" 

„-,,,.  ^  ^^^  *^o  vices,  the  designs 

and  the  accdents.  whieh  ,ed  to  the  formation  and  deve, ^ 
ment  of  our  Colonial  Empire,  what  are  its  present  v^e 
and  prospeet.e  importance,  and  how  these  n,ay  he    „ 
ased  by  proper  eultivation  of  the  e^igration-fieL  that 

During  the  past  twenty  years  both  the  area  and  the 
population  of  our  colonies  have  been  nearly  doubled  and 
then,  trade  has  been  far  more  than  doubL.    W  b  Iw 

ox.p.nth     have  made  immense  pro,.ess  in  the  open^ 
up  of  matenal  resources  and  in  the  growth  of  social  and 


political  iiistitutioiip.  Much,  tliorcfoic,  had  to  be  re-writtcn, 
and  much  to  bo  nTidcd,  in  order  to  Iriii^'  the  record  down  to 
date.  I  liav(!  adhered,  however,  to  tlu;  ori^^inal  plan  of  tiic 
work,  6a}in;^  in  it  only  what  seemed  to  mc  most  useful,  and 
not  attempting  to  crowd  it  with  more  details  than  there 
was  room  for. 

London, 
lO^A  July,  1888. 


J 


1 


on, 

to 

Llio 

,11(1 


CONTENTS. 


I 


CHAPTEI?  I, 

OVn    K.VKLIKST    COLONIES. 

Intr(,,lnction-Tho  Catluiyan   Fables     D!  • 

^^ir  Walter  l^aleigh-m    'L  7  i     V.T'''''*"^  <''""•••'  '•^"•l 
Colonies.     [1490-1783]  ^^^'-^t^^  -  l-nglaucl'.    other 

CHAPTEli  II. 

OUR   FIRST   NVtST  IM.IA.V  COLONY 

The  First  English  Settlements  in  the  West  Indies  Tho  F  ,  . 
of  ^ir  John  Hawkins  and  his  .Successors  T,7^.  '^  ' 
and  Early  History  of  I5arba.los-Lord  Wi  7  .  ^"i""'^^''"» 
-The  Civn  War  in  iWhado-L:;^  '  ^^^^^^^ 
George  Ayscue-The  IWre.s  of  tbo  T  ,  °/  ^^  ^"''  ^'^ 
-Seventeenth  Century-Its  Trie  and  I^'  t"^^  ^'"'"'"^  *^« 
and  their  Sufferings     [1562  1700.]       '"^'"'"*'""-''^'''''  '^^^ves 

CHAPTElt  III. 

JAMAICA   ANI.  THE    UrcCANKKl's 

of  Sir  Hciry  m„^:;^;ToTw  r„rr"''^  '^ 

liucoanoers-ns  Early  IWrcs,    T       r    m    '"""'  ""'"'  "'" 
a..a  .„bso,,„ont  DisaX;,    "ST,-';^./"'":'''--''','--  "'  "'»-• 


I'AdG 


17 


2S 


40 


Vlll 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


JAMAICA  AND  SLAVERY. 


PAnn 


The  Progress  of  Jamaica — Its  Value  to  England — Slavery — The 
Slave  Insurrections — The  Rising  of  17G0 — The  Condition  of 
the  Slaves — The  Insurrection  of  1832— The  Abolition  of 
Slavery  in  1834.    [1712-1834.] 51 

CHAPTER  V. 

OUR  WEST  INDIAN   POSSESSIONS. 

The  Bermudas— The  Bahamas— Other  West  Indian  Islands— British 
Guiana — Trinidad — Jamaica — The  Present  Condition  of  our 
West  Indian  Colonies — The  Causes  of  their  Deterioration  and 
the  Moans  of  their  Improvement.     [1593-1888.]      .        .        .50 


CHAPTER  VI. 

NEWFOUNDLAND. 

The  Beginning  of  the  Newfoundland  Fisheries — The  Growth  of 
Newfoundland  as  a  Colony  —  English  Neglect  of  it  —  The 
Fishers  and  the  Colonists — Its  Troubles  during  War  with 
Frauce— Its  Subsequent  Development — Seal-Hunting  and  Cod- 
Fishing.     [1497-1888.]     .        - 71 

CHAPTER  VII. 

FRENCH  NORTH  AMERICA. 

The  French  in  North  America — The  Colony  of  New  France — 
Samuel  Champlain — The  Progress  of  the  Colony — Wars  with 
the  Indians  and  the  English — The  Contests  between  the 
English  and  French  Colonists — The  English  Conquests  of 
Nova  Scotia,  Cape  Breton,  and  Canada.    [1524-1760.]    .        .       83 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

KOVA  SCOTIA  AND  NEW  BRUNS^yICK. 

The  French  Settlers  in  Nova  Scotia — Their  Banishment  in  1755 — 
Progress  of  Nova  Scotia,  Cape  Breton,  and  New  Brunswick 
under  the  English — A  Fire  in  New  Brunswick — Prince  Edward 
Island.     [1713-18(51.] 


96 


■  1 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  IX. 


CANADA. 


IX 


PACE 


The  History  of  Canada  under  British  Rule— The  First  American 
War — Internal  Troubles — The  French  and  English  Canadians 
— The  Second  American  War — Fresh  Domestic  Ditficulties — 
The  Rebellions  of  1837  and  1838— Lord  Durham's  Services  to 
the  Colony — Its  Later  History— The  Canadian  Confederation. 
[1760-1867.] 103 


)9 


CHAPTER  X. 

THE  Hudson's  bay  territory. 

The  Hudson's  Bay  Company  and  its  Territory — Rivalry  in  the 
Eighteenth  Century — The  Character  and  Working  of  the 
Company — ^Its  Servants  and  Subjects — The  Red  River  Settle- 
ment— Vancouver  Island  and  British  Columbia— Dissolutioii 
of  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company.    [1670-1871.]  .... 


121 


CHAPTER  XI. 

BRITISH   NORTH   AMERICA. 

The  Dominion  of  Canada — Its  Constitution — A  General  View  of 
the  British  North  American  Colonies — Prince  Edward  Island 
— Cape  Breton — Nova  Scotia — New  Brunswick  —  Quebec — 
Ontario— Manitoba — The  North- Western  Territories — British 
Columbia  and  Vancouver  Island.    [1807-1888.] 


131 


CHAPTER  XII. 

EIGHTEENTH   CENTURY   CHANGES. 

Old  and  New  Colonizing  Policies — Effects  of  European  Wars  on 
Colonial  History — The  Supremacy  of  England — Our  Mediter- 
ranean Possessions — Gibraltar — Malta — Cyprus — Heligoland. 
[1704-1888.] 146 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

WEST   AFRICA. 

The  West  African  Settlements — Sierra  Leone — Gambia — Cape 

Coast  Castle— Lagos.    LHJ00-1S8S.] 155 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


CAPK   rOLOXY. 


The  Dutch  Settlement  on  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope — Early  Quarrels 
with  the  Hottentots  and  Cruel  Treatment  of  them — Transfer 
cf  the  Colony  to  England — Its  Progress  under  British  Rule — 
The  Kaffir  Wars  and  other  Troubles— The  Boers  and  the 
Orange  Free  State — Other  Offshoots  of  the  Colony.  [1G48- 
1888.] 


PACK 


158 


CHAPTER  XV. 

NATAL. 

The  Kaffirs— First  English  Visits  to  the  Eastern  Coast  of  South 
Africa — The  Settlement  of  Port  Natal — Its  Early  Troubles  and 
Later  Progress — The  Transvaal — Quarrels  with  the  Boers  and 
the  Zulus -Other  Complications  in  South  Africa.  [16S3-18SS.]     177 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

BRITISH  INDIA. 

The  Progress  of  British  Trade  and  Conquest  in  India — Its  Piesent 
Condition — Burmah  and  Assain.     [1600-18SS.] 


187 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

OUR   ASIATIC    COLONIES. 

Ceylon — Its  Early  Civilization — Its  Subjection  to  the  Portuguese, 
the  Dutch,  and  the  English — Its  Present  Condition — The 
Sti  lits  Settlements  :  Malacca,  Penang,  and  Singapore — Hong 
Kong — Sarawak  and  Labuan — The  Achievements  of  Sir  James 
Brooke— British  North  Pjrneo— Mauritius.     [1795-1888.]      .     191 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

EARLY  AUSTRALASIAN   DISCOVERIES. 

Portuguese  and  Dutch  Visits  to  Australia  —  Tasman  —  English 
Voyagers  —  Dampier  in  Australia  —  Captain  Cook  in  New 
Zealand  and  Australia — French  Expeditions.     [1  GOG- 1788.]     . 


202 


CONTENTS. 


XI 


CHAPTER  XIX. 


THE    FIUST  ArsTKALIAK    COLONY. 


58 


PAGE 


The  Convict  Sottlcment  in  New  South  Wales— Its  First  Troubles 
—The  ]'^-il  Habits  of  the  Colonists— The  Beginning  of  Better 
Ways — Governor  Macquarie  —  Australian  Discoverers: 
Flinders  and  Bass  —  Inland  Expeditious— The  Progress  of 
New  South  Wales.     [1787-1821.] 210 

CHAPTER  XX. 

OLD   NKW   SOUTH    WALES. 

Progress  of  New  South  Wales  as  a  Free  Colony — Services  of 
Reformed  Convicts — John  Macarthur  and  the  Wool-Trade — 
Sydney  in  1829— Cruel  Treatment  of  the  Convicts— Growth 
of  Free  Institutions — Sir  Richard  Bourke — bevelopnicnt  of 
the  Colony — Explorations  in  the  Interior — The  Aborigines  of 
Australia.     [1821-1839,] 220 


87 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

TASMANIA. 

The  Offshoots  of  New  South  Wales — The  Early  History  of  Tasmania, 
or  Van  Diemen's  Land — Its  Establishment  as  an  Independent 
Colony — Its  Convicts  and  Bush-Rangers— Extermination  of 
the  Aborigines — Its  Best  Governors  :  Sir  George  Arthur  and 
Sir  John  Franklin — Its  Greatest  Prosperity — Its  Deterioration 
and  Present  State.     [1803-1888.] 


231 


91 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

Ni:\V  SOUTH   WALES   AND  THE  PORT  I'lITLLIP  DLSTRICT. 

The  Discovery  of  Port  Phillip— Colonel  Collins's  Attempted 
Settlement  on  its  Coast — Later  Enterprises — Henty,  Batman, 
Fawkner,  and  Mitchell — Buckley's  Adventures  among  the 
Aborigines — Establishment  of  the  Port  Phillip  Settlement — 
The  Progress  of  New  S?""  ^Valcs — The  Squatters  and  their 
Work — Melbourne  between  1 838  and  1850 — Sydney  in  1848. 
[1802-18ol.]      


240 


xu 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  XXIll. 

SOUTH    AUSTRALIA. 


PAGF, 


The  Discovery  and  Colonization  of  South  Australia— The  Wake- 
Held  Scheme  and  its  Failure— Early  Troubles  of  the  Colony— 
Their  Speedy  Removal — The  Copper  Mines — The  Effect  of  the 
Gold  Discoveries  in  Victoria — Later  Progress  of  the  Colony  ; 
Copper,  Wool,  Wheat,  and  Wine— The  Northern  Territory. 
[1822-18S8.] 256 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 

VICTORIA. 

The  Establishment  of  Port  Phillip  as  an  Independent  Colony,  under 
the  Name  of  Victoria — The  Australian  Gold  Discoveries — 
Tno  Ballarat  Gold-Fields — The  Consequences  of  the  Discovery 
— The  Progress  of  Victoria — Melbourne  in  1856 — The  Ballarat 
Outbreak — Political  Changes  in  Victoria — Its  Later  History. 
[1851-1888.] 270 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

MODERN   NEW  SOUTH   WALES. 

The  Later  Progress  of  New  South  Wales — Its  Gold-Fields  and 
their  Fruit — Squatter-Extensions — Political  Growth — Modern 
Sydney — The  Present  Condition  of  New  South  Wales — Its 
Sheep-Runs  and  Coal- Fields.     [1851-lSSS.]     .        .        .        .284 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 

QUEENSLAND. 

Origin  of  the  Moreton  Bay  Settlement — Early  Misrule  in  it — 
Establishment  of  Queensland  as  a  Separate  Colony  —  Its 
Resources  and  Progress.    [1824-1888.] 


293 


CHAPTER  XXVII. 

WEST   AUSTRALIA  AND  WASTE  AUSTRALIA. 

Origin  of  the  Swan  River  Settlement,  or  Western  Australia- 
Early  Misfortunes  of  the  Colony— Its  Present  Condition- 
Explorations  in  the  Interior  of  the  Australian  Continent- 


CONTENTS. 


PACE 


256 


270 


284 


293 


Xlll 


rAtiR 


f^turt  again ;  Stuart ;  Burke  and  Wills-Thc  Character  o 
the  Interior.     [1827-1888  1  v^u-vraccer  ot 

■■' 300 

CHAPTER  XX mi, 

PAKEIIA    NEW    ZEALAND. 

The  New  Zedand  Islands  and  their  Inhabitants-First  Inter 
course  with  Englishmen-The  Massaere  of  the   cIv   an  1 

>vork-ihe  Pakeha  Traders-Articles  of  Trade-Traffic  in 
Human  Heads  Other  Debasing  Eniployinento  the  P^^^^^^^^^ 
-Progress  of  English  Influences-Spread  of  Civilization  Th« 
Character  of  the  Maoris.     [1809-1839  1  ^'^'^'^^*^«n-The 

"•  ^- 320 

CHAPTER  XXIX. 

NEW  ZEALAND   COLONIZATION. 

^''%T,  ,^f '''"    I'^P^l^tion-The  New  ZealJnd  Comnanv 

Growhh  nf  fi,.  n  1  """i-nce  ot  the  Missionaries— Later 

i^rowfch  of  the  Colony.    [1839-1867.1 


332 


CHAPTER  XXX. 

NEW  ZEALAND   WARFARE. 

The  Rival  Races  in  New  Zealand    Th^  tv/t      •  ,t. 

the  Following  Year.  Thpt";:  ^^°"^  ^^^^s  of  1843  and 
-Thp.V  n  7 •  ™'~J^^^  Subsequent  Condition  of  the  Maoris 
—Iheir  Civilization— Their  Numbers     Th«T?  ""*' ^^^aons 

A ue  issue  of  the  Struggle.    [1^43-1869.]      .        . 
CHAPTER  XXXI. 

MODERN  NEW  ZEALAND. 

""''l^ptf  ?r°Tr'  ""  ^«^-y-Its  Recent  Development- 
Its  Present  Conditiou  and  Capabilities.    [1868-1888.] 


310 


353 


XIV 


CONTENTS. 


CHArTER  XXXII. 


FIJI  AND  NEW  GUINEA. 


I'AfiK 


Missionary  Work  among  the  Fijians—  King  Tiiakombau — Annexa- 
tion of  Fiji  by  England — Its  bubscquent  Condition — Other 
Annexations  in  the  Pacific— British  New  Guinea.   [1835-1888.]    ^.IS 


CHAPTER  XXXIII. 

ENGLISH    AUSTRALASIA. 

The  Relative   Advantages  of  our    A-Ustralasian  Colonies — Their 

Progress  and  their  Prospects 367 

CHAPTER  XXXIV. 

THE    END  OF  THE  STORY. 

The  Value  of  our  Colonies  —  The  Political  and  Commercial 
Advantages  Derived  and  Deri  viable  from  them — Their  Im- 
portance as  Fields  of  Emigration 373 

Index 383 


LIST  OF  MAPS. 


THE   WORLD,   SHOWING   BRITISH    POSSESSIONS 
WEST    INDIES   AND   CENTRAL  AMERICA   . 
DOMINION   OF   CANADA      . 
SOUTH   AFRICA      .... 
AUSTRALIA   .  .  ... 

NEW  ZEALAND        .... 


PAGE 

.  Frontii^piece 

Facing  page    28 

96 

158 

202 

320 


» 


THE  STORY  OF  OUR  COLONIES, 


CHAPTER  I. 


our.   EARLIEST   COLONIES. 


PAGE 

piece 

28 

96 

158 


1 


IN'TnODUCTIOV— THE  CATIIAYAN  FAHLKS— DISCOVERY  OF  AMKIIK'A  BV  JOUS 
CAliOT— ms  •NK\V-F0LN1)-LAM)S  ' — THK  KlUST  El'KOKTS  OF  i\li:  KNCLI.SII 
1\  COLON'IZIXCi  AMERICA — SIU  HUMl'HllEY  (III.HKUT  AM)  SIU  WALTEIl 
UALKKJH — THE  IIISE  OF  ENGMSH  COLONIZATION — THE  KSTAHMSIIMENT 
OF  THE   U.MTKO   STATK.S— KNULANu's   OTHER  COLONIES.      [111)0  — 17b J.J 

OR  the  last  seven  years  the  people  of  Bristol  have 
sent  out  every  year  two,  three,  or  four  light  ships 
in  search  of  the  island  of  Brazil  and  the  Seven 
Cities.'  So  wrote  the  Spanish  ambassador  in 
London  to  his  sovereigns,  Ferdinand  and  Isabella, 
in  1498 ;  and  in  his  brief,  bald  sentence  there  is  echo  of  a 
whole  volume  of  romance. 

The  island  of  Brazil — the  island  of  the  Seven  Cities ; 
these  were  themes  of  eager  talk  and  bold  speculation 
throughout  Europe  four  hundred  years  ago,  when  Europe 
comprised  nearly  all  the  known  world  of  civilization.  A  few 
daring  travellers,  most  of  them  friars,  among  whom  Marco 
Polo  was  chiefly  famous,  had  in  previous  centuries  gone  into 
the  far  East,  there  to  hear  marvellous  tales  of  places  and 
people  supposed  to  exist  yet  farther  east.  Cathay,  the  modern 
China,  and  the  Japanese  and  other  islands  beyond  it — then 
known  by  a  score  of  different  names,  like  the  Seven  Cities 
and  Brazil,  or  the  *  place  of  red  dye' — were  the  subjects  of 

2 


i3 


OUR  EARLIEST  COLO  XT ES. 


coiuitlefis  fcables.  Vast  palaces  of  solid  gold ;  pearls  and 
precioufi  stones,  spices  and  dyes,  such  as  no  gold  in  Europe 
could  buy ;  horses  with  six  legs  apiece,  and  two-headed 
ostriches ;  giants  twenty  feet  high,  and  drawfs  not  two 
spans  long;  fountains  of  perpetual  youth,  and  trees  bearing 
fruit  of  heavenly  wisdom  :  these  and  a  thousand  other 
priceless  treasures  were  said  to  exist  in  those  remote 
regions  ;  and  as  the  t^-avcllers*  tales  were  repeated  with  ever 
fresh  exaggerations,  the  adventurous  youth  of  Chrif  u  uidom 
yearned  more  and  more  to  make  them  their  own.  But 
barren  deserts  peopled  by  savage  races,  and  vast  tracts  of 
lands  wliich,  in  the  old-fashioned  ways  of  travelling,  it  took 
years  to  cross,  were  between  the  world  of  civilization  and 
this  fancied  world  of  something  better  than  civilization  ; 
and  therefore  few  attempted,  and  none  thoroughly  achieved, 
the  enterprise,  until  shrewd  men  remembered  the  specula- 
tion of  the  ancients,  that  the  earth  is  a  round  globe  instead 
of  a  ilat  surface,  and  considered  that  Cathay  and  Brazil 
could  be  reached  much  more  easily  by  ships  sailing  out 
into  the  west  than  by  eastward  travelling  on  land. 

The  first  who  actually  proved  the  truth  of  that  speculation, 
as  all  the  world  knows,  was  Christopher  Columbus.  But 
while  he  was  urging  his  bold  project  upon  Ferdinand  and 
Isabella  of  Spain,  and  before  the  good  queen  had  pawned 
her  jewels  in  order  that  he  might  set  out  upon  his  famous 
voyage  to  the  West  Indies  in  1492,  other  brave  men  were 
turning  their  thoughts,  and  ventuving  on  the  sea,  in  the 
same  direction.  Without  taking  from  Columbus  any  of  the 
great  honour  that  is  his  due,  we  must  render  honour  as 
great  to  certain  merchants  of  Bristol,  whose  wonderful 
exploits  have  hardly  been  recorded,  and  whose  names  even 
have  almost  passed  out  of  memory. 

Four  hundred  years  ago  Bristol  was,  with  the  exception 
of  London,  the  busiest  and  most  prosperous  trading  town  in 
I*]ngland.  In  pursuit  of  their  calling,  its  merchants  guided 
their  little  vessels  to  every  known  haunt  of  commerce,  and 
to  some  which  tliey  alone  frequented.     They  traded  with 


i 


THE  MERCllAXrS  OF  BRISTOL, 


19 


and 
irope 
laded 

two 
aring 
otliei* 
nnoto 
1  ever 
ndom 

But 
.cts  of 
t  took 
n  and 
ation ; 
lieved, 
lecula- 
n  stead 
Brazil 
pg  out 

ilation, 
But 
id  and 
Dawned 
amous 
n  were 
in  the 
of  tlio 
our  as 
iderful 
s  even 

jcption 
town  in 
I  guided 
jc,  and 
Id  with 


m 


Iceland,  and  the  most  northern  parts  of  J'iUropc  ;  their 
trailic  also  took  thcni  down  to  the  rich  cities  of  the  ^ledi- 
terranean,  and  the  pirate-troubled  shores  of  the  Levant. 
It  is  very  likely  that  in  Iceland  they  heard  of  the  early 
expeditions  of  Scandinavian  voyagers  to  the  coasts  of 
Labrador,  wliich  are  supposed  to  havo  influenced  Columbus 
in  his  adventurous  schemes.  It  is  certain  that  in  Venice, 
Genoa,  and  other  Italian  towns,  they  heard  of  the  Cathayan 
fables,  and  the  supposed  marvels  of  the  island  of  Brazil  and 
the  Seven  Cities.  And,  as  is  shown  by  the  sentence  with 
wliic'h  our  story  opens,  they  were  the  first  who  sailed  out  to 
the  west  in  search  of  those  marvels. 

But  of  their  doings  unfortunately  very  little  is  recorded. 
The  only  extant  account  of  what  seems  to  have  been  their 
lirst  enterprise  is  contained  in  two  sentences  of  a  contem- 
porary narrative.  In  1190,*  it  is  there  said,  *  a  ship  of  John 
Jay,  the  younj^'or,  of  800  tons,  and  another,  began  their 
voyage  from  the  King's  Eoad,  Bristol,  to  the  island  of  Brazil, 
ploughing  their  way  through  the  sea  to  the  west  of  Ireland ; 
and  Thlyde,  the  most  scientific  mariner  in  all  England,  was 
the  pilot  of  the  ships.  News  came  to  Bristol  that  the  said 
ships  sailed  about  the  sea  during  nine  months,  and  did  not 
find  the  island,  but,  driven  by  tempests,  they  returned  to  a 
port  on  the  coast  of  Ireland,  for  the  repose  of  themselves 
and  their  mariners.'  The  Bristol  merchants  were  not 
discouraged  by  that  failure  ;  but  of  their  further  exploits  in 
the  ensuing  years,  until  1-197,  we  have  no  details  at  all.  All 
we  know  is  that,  in  spite  of  failure,  they  tried  again  and 
again,  and  thus  prepared  the  way  for  the  success  of  others. 

The  success  was  first  achieved  by  Englishmen,  under  the 
leadership  of  John  Cabot,  a  Venetian  by  birth,  who  had 
settled  as  a  merchant  in  Bristol,  and  who,  if  he  was  not 
himself  partly  the  cause  of  it,  was  an  eager  follower  of  the 
project  in  which  John  Jay,  the  younger,  first  adventured. 
Therein  he  was  mainly  encouraged  by  the  recent  discoveries 

*  The  date  given  in  tlio  manuscript  is  14 SO,  but  this  is  evidently  an 
error.     The  year  li'JO  coincides  witli  tlie  .Spanish  ambassador's  i?tatement. 

2—2 


so 


OUR  EARLIEST  COLOXiES. 


of  Christopher  Columbus,  *  whereof,'  as  Cabot's  son  Sebas- 
tian afterwards  said,  *  was  {,'reat  talk  in  all  the  Court 
of  Kin^  Henry  the  Seventh,  insoinuch  that  all  men,  with 
great  admiration,  afVn-med  it  to  be  a  thing  more  divine  than 
human  to  sail  by  the  west  into  the  east,  by  a  way  that  was 
never  known  before.'  From  King  Henry,  in  1496,  Cabot 
obtained  permission  to  go  out  on  a  more  systematic  voyage 
of  discovery  than  Englishmen  had  yet  attempted,  and  this 
he  did,  with  very  memorable  results,  in  1197. 

With  this  expedition  begins  the  h.istory  of  English 
colonization.  '  In  two  stout  ships,  manned  by  three 
hundred  of  the  ablest  mariners  that  he  could  find,'  it  has 
been  said,  *  John  Cabot  sailed  out  of  Bii:^toi  waters,  near 
the  beginning  of  May.  lie  went  first  to  Iceland,  and 
sailing  thence  almost  due  west,  reached  the  district  now 
known  as  Labrador,  but  called  by  him  and  his  successors 
New-found-land,  on  the  21th  of  June,  1497.  It  was  at  five 
o'clock  in  the  morning  that,  from  the  prow  of  his  ship, 
the  Matthew,  Cabot  first  saw  the  mainland  of  America,  just 
a  year  before  Columbus,  passing  the  West  Indian  islands 
among  which  his  two  earlier  voyages  had  been  spent,  first 
set  eyes  on  the  continent.  No  counterpart  to  the  tropical 
beauty,  and  wealth  of  gold  and  pearls  and  precious  stones, 
which  rewarded  Columbus  and  his  comrades  for  their  daring 
enterprise,  was  seen  by  Cabot  and  his  hardy  followers. 
Instead,  they  found  a  bleak  and  rocky  country,  on  which 
very  few  trees  appeared  to  them  to  grow,  and  of  which  bears 
and  white  antelopes  seemed  to  be  the  chief  inhabitants. 
Some  groups  of  men  and  women  they  saw%  all  clothed  alike 
in  the  skins  of  beasts,  and  with  little  other  furniture  than 
the  bows  and  arrows,  pikes,  darts,  wooden  clubs,  and  slings 
which  helped  them  in  their  frequent  quarrels  with  one 
another.  Black  hawks,  black  partridges,  and  black  eagles, 
as  they  reported,  were  all  the  birds  that  they  could  find ; 
and  the  place  would  have  seemed  to  them  altogether  inhos- 
pitable but  for  its  wonderful  supply  of  cod  and  other  fish."* 

*  Fox  Bourne,  '  English  Seamen  under  the  Tudors,*  vol.  i.,  p.  32. 


I 


CABO  rs  DISCO  I  'EKIES. 


31 


5obas- 
Court 
,  with 
B  than 
it  was 
Cabot 
kToyago 
Lcl  tlii3 

three 
it  has 
•s,  near 
d,   and 
ct  now 
sccssora 
i  at  five 
is  ship, 
ca,  just 
islands 
nt,  first 
tropical 
stones, 
ir  daring 
lUowers. 
[1  which 
h  bears 
,bitants. 
ed  alike 
re  than 
d  shnga 
ith  one 
eagles, 
lid  find; 
inhos- 
fish."* 

32. 


1 


Cabot  discovered  not  only  the  part  of  the  American  continent 
^Yhich  ho  called  New-found-land,  but  also  the  island  now 
known  by  that  name.  Then  he  sailed  northward,  hoping 
thus  to  reach  the  fabled  region  of  Cathay,  for  which  these 
barren  districts  offered  him  but  a  poor  substitute.  He  was 
driven  back,  however,  by  snow  and  fogs  and  icebergs,  which 
so  frightened  his  sailors  that  they  refused  to  proceed  farther  ; 
and  he  was  in  Bristol  again  early  in  August. 

Cathay  was  never  reached  by  John  Cabot,  nor  by  any  of 
his  brave  comrades  and  successors  ;  but  out  of  this  first 
voyage  to  America  issued  its  colonization  by  Englishmen, 
who  have  turned  the  desolate  regions  into  a  source  of  wealth 
almost  rivalling  that  described  in  the  Cathay  an  fables. 
During  several  years  after  1497  visits  'vere  paid  by  the 
Bristol  merchants  and  their  messengers  to  Labrador  and  its 
neighbourhood.  A  few  of  them  settled  there,  and  established 
a  rude  traffic  with  the  natives,  sending  home  such  rarities 
as  they  could  find.  In  1505  Henry  the  Seventh  paid 
13s.  4d.  for  "  wild  cats  and  popinjays  of  the  New-found- 
islands,"  conveyed  to  his  palace  at  Kichmond.  Other 
importations  were  of  kindred  sort. 

Even  at  this  early  period  Englishmen  saw  the  value  of 
those  abundant  supplies  of  cod  and  other  fish  which  Cabot 
regarded  as  the  only  welcome  product  of  the  Newfoundland 
district,  and  which  have  been  a  constant  source  of  wealth 
to  later  adventurers.  Fishing  expeditions  began  at  a  very 
early  date,  and  became  more  and  more  numerous  and 
profitable  in  each  succeeding  generation.  In  1578,  eighty 
years  after  Cabot's  first  voyage,  the  English  fishing  fleet  so 
employed  comprised  fifty  sail,  and  contributed  greatly  to  the 
prosperity  of  Bristol  and  the  other  towns  engaged  in  the  trade. 

Neither  then  nor  for  lon^  after,  however,  was  Newfound- 
land or  any  adjoining  district  colonized  by  the  English. 
One  memorable  attempt  in  that  direction  was  made  by  Sir 
Humphrey  Gilbert  in  1583.  Four  ships,  laden  with  followers 
intended  to  establish  a  settlement  on  the  island,  were 
guided  by  him  to  St.  John's  Harbour ;  but  his  colonists 


'»5 


OUR  EARIJEST  COLONIES. 


proved  mutinous,  anrl  lie  was  unal)lo  to  bring  thcni  into 
subjection,  lie  had  liardly  spent  a  fortni^dit  in  liis  new 
homo  when  ho  found  it  necessary  to  turn  back  towards 
I'jngland,  and  on  his  way  thither  lio  perished  by  shipwreck. 
IIi3  project  died  with  liim. 

Tailuro  also  attended  tlio  coloni/ing  efforts  of  Gilbert's 
famous  half-brother,  Sir  Walter  Kaleigh.  llaleigh  sought 
to  build  up  another  ]higland  in  a  more  genial  part  of  the 
American  continent,  and,  though  his  own  work  was  unsuc- 
cessful, he  must  ever  be  honoured  as  one  of  the  pioneers  of 
the  great  Anglo-Saxon  commonwealth  on  the  other  side  of 
the  Atlantic.  Having  in  15H1  obtained  from  Queen 
Elizabeth  a  charter  as  successor  to  Sir  Humphrey  Clilbert, 
he  organized  several  expeditions  to  the  coast  of  what  is  now 
tho  state  of  North  Carolina,  called  by  him  Virginia,  and 
there  a  colony  was  established  under  the  governorship  of 
Ralph  Lane.  A  hundred  Englishmen  went  out  in  loS.j,  to 
spend  a  year  in  rude  attempts  to  make  for  themselves  a 
homo,  and  in  cruel  treatment  of  the  Indian  natives,  whom 
they  reduced  to  slavery,  and  to  bo  themselves  so  harshly 
used  by  these  Indians  that  they  were  glad  on  the  first 
opportunity  to  return  to  England.  In  1087,  a  second  party 
of  colonists,  a  hundred  and  fifty  in  number,  with  Captain 
John  White  for  their  leader,  went  to  take  their  place.  But 
they  were  even  more  unfortunate  than  their  predecessors. 
Abandoned  by  their  friends  at  home,  all  were  killed  by  the 
natives,  except  a  few  who  wandered  inland  and  gave  up 
their  English  habits  to  share  the  life  of  the  red  men  who 
afforded  them  shelter. 

The  disastrous  issue  of  Gilbert's  and  Raleigh's  projects, 
however,  offered  no  serious  obstacles  to  the  progress  of 
English  colonization.  These  were  only  the  first  pulsations 
in  a  movement  which  was  to  result  in  a  wonderful  extension 
of  English  power  and  influence,  and  to  effect  a  social  revolu- 
tion to  which  modern  history  presents  no  parallel. 

England  was  behindhand  in  the  planting  of  colonies. 
Spain  had  begun  a  century  before  to  take  possession  of  the 


"3! 


THEIR  ORIGIX. 


23 


I 


Ionics, 
of  the 


most  attractive  portions  of  tlic  vast  American  continent. 
Portugal,  (lormany,  and  rranco  liad  followed  tlic  cxaniplo 
before  anything  of  importance  \vas  done  by  Jlngiand.  But 
at  length  she  entered  on  the  work  v.ith  unrivalled  energy, 
an  energy  that  ha3  had  no  abatement  down  to  the  present 
day. 

The  early  delay  and  the  subsequent  cngorness  resulted 
from    the    same    cause.      During   tlio    sixteenth    century 
I'iUgland  was  too  busy  with  her  domestic  affairs  and  with 
liUropean  politics  to   enter  upon  any   sustained   work  in 
distant  quarters,      rrotestantism,  taking  deeper  root  and 
having  healthier  growth  in  our  little  island  than  in  almost 
any  other  State,  had  a  hard  battle  to  fight  Ijoth  at  homo  and 
abroad.     Its  first  great  work  was  in  overthrowing  the  old 
system  of  feudalism  whicli,  strengthened  in  past  centuries 
by  Catholicism,  was  now  its  main  source  of  strength,  and 
in  building  up  the  foundations  of  religious  freedom  that 
were  the  bases  of  the  political,  and,  in  a  measure,  of  tho 
social  freedom  by  which  England  has  become  a  great  and 
powerful  nation.     That  work  induced  an  apparently  over- 
whelming force  of  opposition  from  the  far  greater  powers  of 
Franco  and  Spain,  which,  not  content  with  open  warfare, 
sought  to  gain  their  end  by  fostering  internal  dissension 
and  stirring  up  hatred  and  rebellion  among  the  classes  who, 
on  religious  or  other  grounds,  were  most  in  sympathy  with 
the  great  Catholic  nations.     Warfare,  open  and  secret,  was 
the  grand  business  of  Englishmen  during  the  long  reign  of 
Queen  Elizabeth.     The  men  who,  in  other  circumstances, 
would  have  become  leaders  of  colonization,  with  Sir  Francis 
Drake  for  their  most  illustrious  representative,  expended  all 
their  wit  and  strength  in  resistance  of  the  enemies  of  their 
country.     But  that  resistance,  wholly  patriotic,  thougli  it 
♦vas  not  in  all  respects  praiseworthy,  was  in  tho  end  very 
helpful   to  the  progress  of   colonization.      Drake  and   his 
fellows,  in  their  defiance  of  Spain,  swept  the  seas,  both 
near  and  distant,   that  were  traversed  by  vessels  laden 
with  the  fruits  of  the  Spanish  colonies.     They  became  the 


24 


OUR  EARLIEST  COLONIES. 


toiTor  of  the  European  coasts.  Their  piratc-sliips  also 
scoured  the  West  Indian  waters,  and  even  made  their  way 
to  the  more  distant  haunts  of  Spanish  conmierco  on  the 
Pacific  shores  of  America  and  in  the  Indian  archipelago. 
Thus  Ihiglish  seamen  learnt  to  ply  their  craft  with  un- 
matched daring,  and,  when  the  proper  time  arrived,  to  plant 
their  colonies  in  the  most  favoured  quarters  of  the  world, 
and  in  other  quarters,  less  favoured  by  nature,  which  were 
made  fertile  by  the  wisdom  and  the  perseverance  of  the 
colonists  tliemselves. 

Concerning  the  first  great  outcomes  of  the  enterprise  thus 
shown,  this  volume  has  not  to  treat  in  detail.  The  wonderful 
history  of  the  East  India  Company,  started  near  tlic  end  of 
Queen  Elizabeth's  reign,  by  which  our  vast  Indian  empire 
has  been  established,  is  rather  a  history  of  trade  and 
conquest  than  of  colonization,  and  to  it  brief  incidental 
reference  in  a  future  page  will  suHice.  And  the  no  less 
wondeiful  history  of  the  great  colonial  work  in  which 
]^nglishmen  were  engaged  in  America  during  the  seven- 
teenth century — a  theme  so  wide  and  eventful  that  more 
than  a  volume  would  be  needed  for  its  separate  handling — 
is  precluded  from  our  plan,  because  the  colonies  thus 
founded,  no  longer  British  possessions,  have  become  them- 
selves a  powerful  nation  as  the  United  States  of  America. 
A  few^  paragraphs,  therefore,  will  serve  for  summing  up  all 
that  here  needs  to  be  told  concerning  them. 

The  work,  begun  with  Kaleigh's  luckless  experiments,  was 
more  successfully  carried  on  by  two  companies  of  '  knights, 
gentlemen,  and  merchants' — the  one  party  belonging  to 
London,  the  other  to  the  West  of  England — to  whom  jointly 
a  charter  for  the  colonization  of  America,  under  Ealeigh's 
name  of  Virginia,  was  granted  by  James  the  First  in  IGOG. 
Three  small  ships  full  of  emigrants  were  sent  out  on  that 
errand  near  the  end  of  the  year,  and  the  difficult  task  of 
planting  the  little  colony  was  achieved  by  Captain  John 
Smith,  whose  tact  in  making  friends  with  the  Indians, 
by  help  of   the  native  king   Powhatan  and   his   daughter 


THE  SETTLEMEXTS  IX  AMERICA. 


-3 


was 

^bts, 

to 

itly 
igh's 
606. 
Itliat 
Ik  of 
[ohn 

ms, 
liter 


I 


Pocahontas,  liaj  been  often  described  in  history  and 
romance.  The  settlement  was  steadily  recruited  by  fresh 
arrivals  from  England,  and  it  was  directed  with  tolerable 
success  by  later  governors  who  followed  to  some  extent  in 
the  course  marked  out  by  Smith.  Its  lirst  important  trade 
was  in  tobacco,  which,  sold  in  Europe,  enabled  the  colonists 
to  supply  themselves  with  all  needful  commodities  from  the 
mother  country.  A  great  resort  of  cavaliers  and  their 
dependants  during  the  times  of  civil  war  and  Commonwealth 
rule  in  England,  it  became  the  most  aristocratic  of  the 
American  '  plantations,'  the  centre  of  agriculture  and 
slavery. 

On  the  northern  part  of  the  district  originally  assigned  to 
Virginia  was  founded  the  colony  of  Maryland,  so  named  in 
honour  of  Queen  Henrietta  Maria,  in  1G32,  with  Lord 
Baltimore  for  its  originaior.  Designed  by  him  as  a  settle- 
ment especially  for  fugitive  Catholics,  it  soon  fell  into  the 
hands  of  persecuting  Protestants,  yet  under  them  attained 
great  prosperity. 

Still  more  prosperous  were  the  colonies  founded  and 
developed  during  the  same  period  by  the  Puritans.  '  The 
land  is  weary  of  her  inhabitants,'  said  ciie  Pilgrim  Fathers 
who  quitted  England  in  the  Mayjloicer  in  1G20,  '  so  that 
man,  which  is  the  most  precious  of  all  creatures,  is  here  more 
vile  and  base  than  the  earth  we  tread  upon  ;  so  as  children, 
neighbours,  and  friends,  especially  the  poor,  are  accounted 
the  greatest  burthens,  which,  if  things  were  right,  would  be 
the  highest  earthly  blessings.  Ilence  it  comes  to  pass  that 
all  arts  and  trades  are  carried  on  in  that  deceitful  nnxnner 
and  unrighteous  course  as  it  is  almost  impossible  for  a  good, 
upright  man  to  maintain  his  charge  in  any  of  them.' 
Driven  thus  from  old  England,  they  set  up  their  new 
England  on  the  western  shores  of  the  Atlantic,  and,  as  tide 
after  tide  of  emigrants  crossed  the  ocean,  one  city  after 
another  was  founded,  until  in  10-13  there  were  four  goodly 
groups  of  settlements,  known  as  Plymouth,  Massachusetts, 
Connecticut,  and  Newhavcn,  which  organized  themselves  as 


26 


OUR  EARLIEST  COLONIES. 


the  United  Colonies  of  New  England,  the  first  germ  of  the 
United  States.  The  Puritan  plantations  grew  mightily. 
But  IMilton  has  said  that  '  new  Presbyter  is  buL  old  Priest 
writ  large,'  and  so  it  proved  with  the  champions  of  religious 
freedom  in  the  New  Wor'd.  The  liberty  which  they  claimed 
for  themselves  was  denied  to  all  who  differed  from  them,  and 
persecution  was  as  rife  in  America  as  in  England.  One 
great  benefit,  however,  sprang  therefrom.  Not  only  did 
fresh  streams  of  emigration  flow  from  England,  but  hardly- 
used  members  of  the  established  colonies  branched  off  to 
establish  younger  colonies  for  themselves  ;  and  thus  the 
entire  coast-line  was  rapidly  peopled  with  enterprising 
settlers,  who,  seeking  their  own  wealth  and  comfort,  turned 
the  whole  region,  from  Maine  down  to  Georgia,  into  a 
scene  of  unrivalled  wealth  and  progress. 

When  in  1776  the  thirteen  colonial  states  in  America 
resolved  to  throw  off  their  allegiance  to  Great  Britain — a 
secession  rendered  necessary  by  English  misrule,  and 
sullenly  agreed  to  in  1783  —  their  population  comprised 
about  two  million  white  men,  and  nearly  half  a  million 
si;  -OS.  In  the  ensuing  century  the  United  States,  increased 
to  thirty-eight,  with  eight  associated  territories,  became 
more  than  twenty-four  times  as  populous.  This  mighty 
group  of  English  settlements  and  their  offshoots  has  grown 
into  a  nation  which  already  comprises  nearly  twice  as  many 
inhabitants  as  the  mother  country,  and  whicli  is  nearly 
twenty-five  times  as  large  if  measured  by  the  extent  of  land 
which  it  occupies. 

Yet  the  colonial  possessions  now  held  by  Great  Britain, 
and  mainly  acquired  since  the  loss  of  the  American  colonies, 
the  most  striking  features  in  whose  history  have  now  to  bo 
set  forth,  comprise  an  area  thrice  as  great,  and  a  population 
nearly  six  times  as  numerous,  as  those  of  the  United 
States.  The  extent  of  territory  is  not  likely  to  be  very  much 
augmented.  But,  except  in  over-crowded  India  and  some  of 
our  smallest  colonies,  the  number  of  inhabitants  may  be  in- 
creased almost  without  limit.     The  poet's  anticipations, 


m  of  the 
mightily. 
d  Priest 
reh'gioiis 
'■  claimGcl 
lem,  and 
id.  One 
only  did 
b  hardly- 
ed  off  to 
thus  the 
Drprising 
fc, turned 
,  into  a 

America 

:itain — a 

Lilo,    and 

)mprised 

million 

Licrcased 

became 

mighty 

s  grown 

as  many 

3  nearly 

t  of  land 

Britain, 
colonics, 
D\v  to  bo 
pnlation 
United 
ry  much 

some  of 
ly  be  in- 
ipations, 


T//£//^  OUTCOME. 


27 

warranted  by  tlie  progress  that  had  been  made  before  he 
wrote,  have  as  yet  been  only  very  partially  realized : 

'As  the  clement  of  air  affords 
An  easy  passa-e  to  th.   industrious  bce^ 
|rau.:l>t  with  their  burthens  ;  and  a  wny  as  sn.ooth 

nr  those  ordained  t<,  take  their  soundin^.  fl.^ht 
1  von,  the  thronged  hive,  and  settle  ^vhere  tliey  list 
In  fresh  abodes,  their  labours  to  renew  • 
So  the  wide  waters,  open  to  tlie  power,  ' 
J  he  will,  the  instincts,  and  appointed  needs 
yn  i.ntain,  do  invite  her  to  cast  off 
Her  swarms,  .and  in  succession  send  thein  forth 

ound  to  establish  new  communities  ' 

n  every  shore  wliose  asj.ect  favours  hope 
Ur  bold  adventure  ;  promising  to  skill 
And  perseverance  tlieir  deserved  reward 

This")?,,;;'!"  iT^^^'^'P'  *"'•  •''•■'^"t^y  performed, 
Ihis  land  shall  witness  ;  and,  as  days  roll  on. 

Jv-vrth  s  universal  frame  shall  feel  tiie  effect    ' 

J;^veu  till  the  smallest  habitable  rock, 

Beaten  by  lonely  billows,  hear  the  son-s 

()f  Iiumanized  society,  and  bloom 

A  '      f^}\  '"'^'  *''*''<^  ^''■^"  hv^^th^  forth  their  frarr,.nPP 
A  grateful  tribute  to  all-ruling  Heaven.-        ''"fiance, 

*  Wordsworth,  'The  Excarsion,' Lock  ix. 


i 


.:.. .  ^. 


^-v^^ 


>v^ 


CHAPTER  II. 


OUR   FIRST   WEST   INDIAN   COLONY. 


Tin:   Fin.ST   KNT.MSII    SETTLKMF.NTS    IN   THE   WEST   IXPTES— THE   ETPI.OITS  Ol" 

KIR   JOHN'    Hawkins   and    his    successous — the    colonization    and 

EAUI.Y  HISTOUY  OK  HAHISAOOS — LOUD  WILLOUOIl  15V  OV  TARHAM — THE 
CIVIL  WAR  IN  1?AHBA1)0S — LOKI)  WILLOrcHHV  AND  SIR  OEOROE  AYSCl'E 
— THE  PKOr.UESS  OK  THE  ISLAND  DUKINi}  THE  SEVENTEENTH  CENTURY — 
ITS     TRADE     AND     TOl'ULATION — THE     SLAVES    AND     THEIR    SUFFERINGS. 

[15G'2-1700.] 

F  the  colonies  now  in  the  possession   of  Great 
Britain,  Newfoundland  claims  to  be  the  oldest ; 
but  the  first  regular  plantations  were  in  the  West 
Indies.   These  were  indeed,  the  scene  of  frequent 
fighting  between  English  and  Spaniards,  which  led 
to  their  colonization,  long  before  there  was  any  permanent 
settlement  of  our  countrymen  upon  the  American  continent. 
It  was  an  island  of  the  Bahamas  group  that  Christopher 
Columbus,  believing  he  had  thus  attained  his  project  of  dis- 
covering a  western  passage  to  Cathay,  first  visited  on  the 
12tli  of  October,  1402;  and  at  San  Domingo,  in  Hispaniola, 
or  Ilayti,  he  soon  afterwards  organized  the  centre  of  Spanish 
government,  whence   proceeded   countless   expeditions  for 
conquering  and  colonizing  the  adjacent  islands  and  main- 
land, all  of  which  were  then  known  as  the  West  Indies. 
For    some   time   the   Spaniards   were   left    in    undisputed 
possession  of  these  regions.    To  the  King  of  Spain  they  were 
assigned  by  a  Papal  bull,  which  none  dared  to  dispute  until 
Protestantism  was  powerful  enough  to  set  at  defiance  the 
authority  of  Rome ;  and  by  the  Spaniards  they  were  cruelly 


inaiii- 
ndies. 
Iputccl 
I  \Yere 
I  until 
the 
luelly 


II A  \VKIi\S  'S  SI  A  I TT-  TRADING. 


despoiled  without  hindrance  until  the  native  Indians,  re- 
duced to  bitter  slavery  by  their  conquerors,  were  almost 
exterminated. 

England,  in  fact,  was  first  brought  into  important  relations 
with  the  West  Indies  by  a  memorable  plan — the  successful 
working  out  of  which  cannot  be  looked  back  upon  without 
shame — to  supply  the  need  occasioned  by  the  rapid  dying 
out  of  these  Indian  victims.  The  originator  both  of  the 
negrc  slave-trade  and  of  our  West  Indian  colonization  was 
Sir  John  Hawkins,  one  of  the  most  eminent  of  the  great 
seamen  under  Queen  Elizabeth.  In  his  youth,  says  his  old 
biographer,  *  he  made  divers  voyages  to  the  isles  of  the 
Canaries,  and  there,  by  his  good  and  upright  dealing,  being 
grown  in  honour  of  the  people,  informed  himself  of  the  state 
of  the  West  Indies;  and  being  amongst  other  things  informed 
that  negroes  were  very  good  merchandize  in  Ilispaniola,  and 
that  store  of  negroes  might  easily  be  had  upon  the  coast  of 
Guinea,  he  resolved  within  himself  to  make  trial  thereof.'* 

This  change  from  *  good  and  upright  dealing  '  was  begun 
in  1562.  With  three  little  vessels  Hawkins  then  proceeded 
from  England  to  Guinea,  where  he  captured  three  hundred 
negroes,  and,  crossing  the  Atlantic,  he  sold  his  cargo  at 
great  profit  to  the  Spaniards  in  San  Domingo.  His  only 
purpose  in  so  doing  was  the  adoption  of  a  lucrative  and,  in 
his  eyes,  a  harmless  trade.  King  Philip  the  Second  of  Spain, 
however,  regarded  any  English  interference  with  his  colonial 
possessions  as  an  offence  to  himself,  and  a  source  of  danger 
to  those  possessions.  He  confiscated  a  portion  of  Hawkins's 
return  cargo  which  found  its  way  to  Cadiz,  and  sent  out 
strict  injunctions  to  the  West  Indies,  that  if  Hawkins 
appeared  there  again  no  business  was  to  be  transacted  with 
him.     Hawkins  did  not  choose  to  be  so  thwarted. 

In  IST-i  he  fitted  out  a  larger  fleet  of  trading-ships,  five  in 
number,  and,  having  collected  a  larger  cargo  of  negroes  on 
the  western  coast  of  Africt\,  went  to  sell  them  to  the  Spanish 
colonists.     King  Philip's  orders  prevented  his  returning  to 

♦  Prince,  '  Worthies  of  Devon,'  p.  3S9. 


.o 


ou/^  j'iRST  irr.sT  ixnrAX  coloxv. 


San  Domingo,  but  ho  disposed  of  his  slaves  on  th.c  Spanish 
Main,  and  \vas  able  to  take  liomo  a  goodly  store  of  'gold, 
silver,  pearls,  and  other  jewels,'  which  yielded  a  proiit  of 
sixty  per  cent.,  after  all  the  expenses  of  the  voyage  had  been 
paid.  Queen  Elizabeth  rewarded  him  with  a  baronetcy,  and 
the  addition  of  a  negro,  '  in  his  proper  colour,  bound  and 
captive,'  to  his  coat-of-arms  ;  and  King  Philip  complained 
loudly  of  his  insolent  conduct  in  again  interfering  with  tho 
colonial  trade  of  Spain. 

Those  complaints,  however,  only  induced  Sir  John  Hawkins 
to  make  a  third  expedition,  greater  and  more  eventful  than 
eitlier  of  its  predecessors.  Upon  this  ho  started,  with  young 
Francis  Drake  for  one  of  his  captains,  at  the  head  of  six 
vessels  and  fifteen  hundred  men,  in  15G7.  The  voyage  was 
to  him  and  his  followers  wholly  unfortunate,  lie  could  only 
obtain  a  scanty  supply  of  negroes  on  the  African  coast,  and 
of  these  ho  ha  1  dilliculty  In  disposing  on  tho  Spanish  Main. 
On  his  way  home  he  was  forced  to  seek  shelter  from  bad 
weather,  and  the  water  of  which  his  ships  were  in  sore  need, 
by  entering  the  Spanish  port  of  San  Juan  de  Ulloa,  in 
Mexico.  There,  after  a  terrible  light  with  the  Spania)"ds,  he 
was  utterly  defeated.  Great  numbers  of  his  conu'ades  were 
slain.  A  few  escaped  with  him  to  England.  A  hundred 
were  taken  prisoners  and  made  slaves  of  by  their  enemies. 
*  All  our  business,'  wrote  llawidns  after  his  return  to 
Plymouth,  'hath  had  infelicity,  misfortune,  and  an  un- 
happy end.  If  I  w^ero  to  write  of  all  our  calamities,  I  am 
sure  a  volume  as  great  as  the  Bible  will  scarcely  suflice.' 

Yet  his  calamities  furnished  even  a  stronger  motive  than 
his  earlier  successes  for  continuance  of  the  work  that  he  had 
begun.  Bitter  hatred  of  Spain  was  growing  up  among  all 
Englishmen,  and  the  hatred  was  increased  in  the  hearts  of 
many  by  these  West  Indian  disasters.  A  desire  to  punish 
the  Spaniards  for  the  injuries  they  had  inflicted  on  the 
English,  and  forcibly  to  wrest  from  them  a  share  of  the 
trade  which  they  were  forbidden  to  obtain  in  peaceable  ways, 
actuated  many,  and  none  so  keenly  or  with  such  famous 


KNGI.A ND  A  GAINS  T  Sl\  1 AV. 


"^i 


Spanish 
:  'gold, 
iroiit  of 
acl  been 
;6y,  and 
nd  and 
plained 
ith  tho 

[awkins 
ul  tlian 
li  young 
I  of  six 
age  was 
uld  only 
ast,  and 
ti  Main, 
om  bad 
I'c  need, 
Uoa,  in 
a)'ds,  he 
es  were 
undred 
nemies. 
burn   to 
Ian   un- 
!,  I  am 
ice.' 
[e  than 
Ihe  had 
long  all 
rts  of 
unisli 
n  tho 
lof  the 
ways, 
lamous 


consequences  as  Sir  Francis  Drake,  who  had  himself  suffered 
and  lost  nuich  by  the  failure  of  Hawkins's  third  expedition. 
Drake  started  on  a  warfare  of  his  own  against  Spain.  Over 
and  over  again  he  made  what  would  now  be  called  piratical 
voyages  to  tho  West  Indies  and  the  Spanish  Main,  and  in 
the  course  of  these  he  captured  nuich  and  destroyed  nmch 
more.  Others  joined  with  him  or  followed  in  his  track  after 
he  had  entered  upon  nobler  pursuits  in  tho  legitimate  service 
of  his  country,  still  with  the  same  great  end  in  view,  tho 
injuring  of  Spain  and  the  seizure  of  the  wealth  she  was 
acquiring  in  the  West  Indies  and  on  the  neighbouring  main- 
land. Actual  conquest  of  tho  Spanish  possessions  was  not 
tlien  thought  of.  The  one  thing  aimed  at  was  the  spoliation 
of  the  enemy.*  But  when  that  spoliation  had  been  to  a 
great  extent  effected,  conquest  and  colonization  naturally 
and  easily  ensued.  Thus  it  was  that  tho  West  Indies  began 
to  pass  from  the  hands  of  Spain  into  those  of  England. 

The  islands  first  seized  by  England,  however,  only  nomi- 
nally belonged  to  Spain,  which,  while  laying  claim  to  tho 
whole  group  by  virtue  of  Columbus's  discovery,  colonized 
none  but  those  most  conveniently  situated  in  relation  to 
llispaniola,  and  serviceable  as  places  of  resort  for  the  fleets 
and  armies  engaged  in  the  conquest  and  government  of  tho 
territories  on  the  continent  that  were  owned  by  Spain,  from 
Mexico  down  to  Chili.  Many  islands  were  never  actually 
appropriated  by  her,  although  on  that  account  she  looked 
none  the  less  jealously  upon  attempts  at  their  appropriation 
made  by  other  nations. 

So  it  was  with  Barbados  and  all  the  Caribbean  group. 
To  Barbados — thus  named  by  some  Portuguese,  who,  first 
visiting  it,  were  struck  by  its  profuse  store  of  luxuriant  lig- 
trees  or  banyans,  from  whose  branches  hung  down  masses 
of  foliage  resembling  *  barbudos,'  or  beards — the  Spaniards 
only  went  in  order  to  capture  the  fierce  Indians  who  there 
resided,  and  who  proved  such  sturdy  slaves  that  within  a 

*  The  story  of  this  work  has  been  told  at  some  length  in  the  second 
voliunc  uf  my  '  Enyli.sh  Seamen  under  the  Tudurs.' 


32 


OUR  FIRST  l\l:S:''  JXn/AN  CO/MM'. 


slioit,  tiiiu^   tlioy   worn   nil  l\i(lii!i]>p(Ml   ami   tlio   island  waa 
utt(Mly  (loKcrtod.      It  was  imiiihaltitcd  wIumi,  in    l(i()5,  tlio 
crew  of  tho  (Uiiw   ///o.s.so///     a  vessel  littcd  (uit  by  Sii*  Olivn 
Leij^'Ii,  •  a  worsliipful  kiii^^Mit  of  Kent' — eliaiiced  to  land  on 
its  shores.     Tliey  look  possession  of  the  island,  ])Iantin;^'  in 
a  ])ronnn(Mit  loeality  a  (M'oss,  with  the  insrri[)tion,  *  -lames, 
Kini^of  I'iii^fland  and  this  island,'  hnt  quitted  it  a^  soon  as 
they  had  i'(>plenished  tJKMr  ship  with  a  snpply  of  the  pi^'s, 
pigeons,  and  lisli  with  which  it  abounded.      Its  colonization 
was  not  atteni].tetl  till  twenty  years  later,  when   another 
vessel,    belon^'iii}^    to    Sir    William    (fourteen,    the    fiimous 
London  merchant,  havinj,'  sou'^'ht  in  its  harbour  shelter  from 
bad  weather,  attcJition  was  a^'ain  called  to  its  beauty  and 
f(Mtility.    In  l()25  Lord  Ijey,  afterwards  I'iai'l  of  Marlborough, 
obtained  from  Kin^'  James  tho  J'^irst  a  ;^rant  of  tho  island 
for  himself  and  his  heirs,  and  by  him  (lourteen  was  com- 
missioned to  establish  thereon  tho  first  I'^n/^dish  colony  in 
tho  West  Jndies.     This  was  done  l)y  a  party  of  about  forty, 
who  in  the  same  year  wont  out  and  be^Mu  to  build  .James- 
town around  tho  cross  that  had  been  set  up  in  l()0o;  but 
pro^n-ess  was  delayed  by  quarrels  at  homo,     l!    sjjito  of  tho 
Ih'st  patent,  tho  island  was  in  i()27  granted  by  Charles  tho 
First  to  tho  Earl  of  Carlisle,  who  ])roposcd  to  orj^anizo  '  a 
large    and   copious    colony  of   I'higlish,    to   bo    named   tho 
Carlisle   province,*   embracing   all   tho    Caribbean    Islands, 
from  St.  Christopher  down  to  Trinidad.     Lord  Carlisle  had 
most  inlluenco  at  Court,  and,  after  a  temporary  withdrawal 
of  his  patent,  obtained  its  renewal.     In  1G28  ho  sent  out 
sixty-four   colonists,  who,  under  tho   governorship   of   Sir 
\Villiam  Tufton,  formed  a  rival  power  to  tiiat  established  by 
the  earlier  settlers.     An  angry  feud,  often  leading  to  blood- 
shed,  prevailed  between  tho  two  factions,  known  as  tho 
windward-men  and  the  leew^ard-nien,  until  a  further  arrival 
of  two  hundred  persons  made  Lord  Carlisle's  party  strong 
enough  to  compel  the  submission  of  tho  others ;  and  after 
that  Barbados  very  quickly  rose  to  importance,  both  as 
itself  a  prosperous  plantation,  with  nearly  two  thousand 


'/•///:  J'J.A\ r/.\\j  01'  IIAKIIADOS. 


1 ) 


111(1  wan 
I  ".or),  tlio 
•^ir  Olivn 
liind  on 
,iitiii}^'  ill 

'  .IllllUiR, 

soon  as 
ho  pi^'3, 
)iii/atiou 
another 
famous 
Itor  from 
aiity  and 
horoui^h, 
10  ishinrl 
vas  coiii- 
!olony  in 
-^wi  forty, 
(1  Jamcs- 
)05  ;  l)ut 
o  of  tlio 
rlos  tlio 
anizo  '  a 
ncd   tho 
Ishinds, 
islo  had 
hdrawal 
cnt  out 
of    Sir 
shed  by 
blood- 
as  tho 
arrival 
strong 
id  after 
oth  as 
iiousand 


inhahitanls,  reinforced  oaeli  year  l)y  fresh  arrivals,  mid  as  a 
centre  for  the  eaptuiv;  and  coloiii/atioii  of  tho  neij^hbouring 
islands. 

Tlie  details  of  this  ca])tnr(!  and  eoloni/atioii  iiecid  not  hr-rcj 
he  ^'iven.  Some  of  the  islands  \V(M'e  merely  seized  and  aban- 
doned, not  to  h(!  perniiiiKiiitiy  0(!('n|)i('d  by  l'hi;^dishnien  until 
many  yiNirs  latei'.  OtlnM'S,  of  wliieli  St.  ('hristo])ii(!r  was  the 
])rin(!i])al,  becainf?  ])ros])er()us  s(!ttl(!nients  for  a  time,  but, 
tiirouf^di  various  caustis,  ])assed  out  of  Mn^dish  hands,  only  to 
1)0  recovered  long  afterwards.  J5arI)ados  alonc!  among  the 
eastern  group  of  West  Indian  Islands  gnsitiy  llourisiied 
during  the  sevcntcentii  century,  and  in  v.ww  its  ]u*ogr(!SS 
there  were  disturbing,  though  hardly  nistraining,  inlhuiiices. 
The  main  cause  of  turmoil  within  it  was  also  jui  important 
cause  of  its  advancement.  The  strife  of  parties  at  homo 
under  Chares  tho  First  and  tlie  (Commonwealth  leaders,  in- 
ducing many  hhiglishmen  to  seek  peace  in  the  second 
I'higland  that  was  growing  up  on  the  American  continent, 
drove  many  also  to  the  fertile  little  island.  '  These  adven- 
turers,' says  the  I'^jarl  of  Clarendoii,  '  planted  without  any- 
body's leave,  and  without  being  opposed  or  contradicted  )jy 
anybody.'  In  IG-jO,  twenty-five  years  after  the  first  party  of 
settlers  had  arrived,  the  population  comprised  twenty  thou- 
sand white  men,  with  a  large  number  of  negro  slaves,  audit 
was  endowed  with  representative  institutions,  having  a 
General  Assembly  modelled  after  tho  English  House  of 
Commons. 

It  had  already  grown  too  largo  to  be  managed  by  tho 
Earls  of  Carlisle  or  tho  agents  whom  they  sent  out  as 
governors  on  their  behalf.  Accordingly,  in  1G47,  the  second 
Earl  elTected  an  arrangement  with  Lord  Willoughby  of 
jParham,  to  whom  he  assigned  half  tho  property  of  tho 
Kvhole  Caribbean  group  for  a  term  of  twenty-one  years,  on 
{condition  of  his  going  out  as  lieutenant-general,  'for  the 
[better  setthng  and  recovering  of  tlie  islands.'  That  treaty 
shad  memorable  consequences.  Lord  Willoughby,  till  then 
^a  Parliamentarian,  was  at  this   time  beginning    to   s}m- 

3 


% 


34 


OUR  FIRST  Wtyr  IXDIAX  CO  LOW. 


patlii/o  ^vith  tlio  Cavalier  party.  Sliortly  before  tlic  execution 
of  ('liarles  the  First  lie  was  iinpoaclicd  for  lii^'h  treason,  and 
his  estates  were  confiscated,  lie  escaped  to  "Holland,  whore 
lie  openly  took  up  the  Uoyalist  cause,  and  thence,  in  J  050, 
he  proceeded  to  Jiarbados,  intendinf^  to  make  of  the  West 
Indies  a  stron;,diold  for  Charles  the  Second.  Civil  war  was 
already  wa^niij^'  in  the  island,  and  Ijord  Willou^diby  organized 
troops,  set  up  foi-ts,  and  equipped  vessels  for  the  overthrow 
of  the  colonial  Koundhcads. 

lie  was  so  successful  that  Lord  Protector  Cromwell 
despatched  a  fleet,  with  two  thousand  soldiers  on  board, 
under  Sir  George  Ayscue,  to  oppose  him.  Ayscue  arrived 
on  the  loth  of  October,  1G51,  and  on  the  following  morning 
made  an  easy  capture  of  fifteen  vessels  lying  in  the  harbour. 
lie  lost  no  time  in  informing  Willoughby  that  the  Parlia- 
ment of  England  desired  that  the  people  of  Barbados  should 
be  sharers  iii  the  liberty  '  which  had  been  purchased  at  the 
expense  of  s.  much  blood  and  treasure,'  and  that  he  was 
connnissioned  to  demand  the  surrender  of  the  island.  Wil- 
loughby's  answer  was,  that  he  acknowledged  no  authority 
but  that  of  King  Charles,  and  that  he  should  expect  repara- 
tion for  the  injuries  inllicted  on  the  loyal  forces  of  the 
sovereign.  Ayscue  then  attempted  to  effect  a  landing,  but 
the  resistance  offered  to  him  was  too  formidable.  On  tho 
2Gth  of  October  he  sent  on  shore  a  manifesto  to  the  in- 
liabilants,  calling  on  them  to  accept  the  free  trade  and 
protection  offered  by  the  Commonwealth,  urging  them  to 
avert  the  destruction  of  their  *  long-laboured-for  estates,' 
which  must  result  from  their  continued  obstinacy,  and  pro- 
mising forgiveness  for  their  past  misdeeds  if  they  would  now 
submit.  The  General  Assembly  replied,  on  the  5th  of 
November,  that  the  good  people  of  the  island  were  proof 
against  the  arguments  of  *  tliose  loose  and  scandalous  papers 
industriously  scattered  up  and  down  to  poison  their  alle- 
giance,' and  that  neither  fear  of  injury  nor  hope  of  reward 
would  weaken  their  loyalty,  *  to  which  their  souls  were  as 
firmly  united  as  to  their  bodies.'     Willcughby  also  wrote  to 


I 


CIVIL   WAR  IN  nARnADOS. 


35 


icutlon 

^vllero 
I  1050, 
3  \Vcst 
,-av  ^v1■s 

jrtlu'OW 


L-omwcll 

I  board, 

arrived 

morning 
harbour, 
i  Tarlia- 
)s  should 
d  at  the 
i  ho  was 
id.     Wil- 
[luthority 
rcpara- 
s  o£    the 
ding,  but 
On  the 
the  in- 
radc  and 
them  to 
estates,' 
and  in-o- 
ould  now 
lc   5th  of 
Here  proof 
lus  papers 
leir  alle- 
)i  reward 
were  as 
^vroto  to 


\yscuo,  acknowledging  tlie  '  civility  '  of  his  conduct,  and 
averring  tliat  lie  did  not  '  serve  the  King  so  nuich  in  expec- 
tation of  his  Majesty's  prosperous  condition  as  in  considera- 
tion of  his  duty/  and  that  '  ho  would  never  bo  a  means  of 
increasing  the  King's  allliction  by  delivering  up  the  island.' 
'  If  there  be  such  a  person  as  the  King,'  answered  Ayscuo, 
'  the  keeping  of  JJarbados  signifies  nothing  to  the  King's 
advantage.  God  will  own  us  in  our  attempts  against  you  as 
Woi  has  hitherto  done.' 

Tiicro  was  a  little  further  parleying,  which  led  to  nothing, 
and  in  the  middle  of  Djcember  Ayscuo  effected  a  landing, 
with  a  loss  of  ninety  of  his  men,  against  fifty  of  th.o  enemy 
slain  and  a  hundred  captured.  The  fort  taken  by  him,  how- 
ever, could  not  be  held,  and  he  had  to  return  to  his  ships, 
where  he  tended  the  wounded  prisoners  with  a  *  courtesy ' 
for  which  Willoughby  wrote  to  thank  him.  Willoughby 
continued  to  hold  the  island  for  a  month  longer,  but  one  of 
his  regiments,  a  thousand  strong,  at  length  declared  for  tlio 
rarliament,  and  this  increase  to  Ayscue's  strength  turned 
the  scale,  although  three  thousand  soldiers  were  still  faith- 
ful to  the  Crown.  Willoughby  then  proposed  a  dignified 
surrender,  not  because  he  himself  was  willing  thereto,  but, 
as  he  said,  '  seeing  that  the  lire  is  now  dispersed  in  tho 
bowels  of  the  island,  and  that  what  may  be  done  in  a  few 
weeks  would  turn  the  face  of  a  country  so  flourishing,  and  so 
great  an  honour  to  our  nation,  into  desolation  and  sadness.' 
Tavourablc  terms  were  granted  to  him  by  Ayscue,  who  de- 
clared himself  '  proportionately  desirous  to  save  Barbados 
from  further  ruin  ;'  and,  by  a  treaty  signed  on  the  12th  of 
January,  1G52,  he  and  his  followers  were  allowed  to  proceed 
to  England  without  confiscation  of  their  property,  and  the 
island  and  its  dependencies  quietly  submitted  to  the  dominion 
of  the  Commonwealth.* 

The  peace  thus  honourably  effected  was  followed  by  a  new 
period  of  prosperity,  although  the  rapid  growth  of  the  popu- 
lation was  not  altogether  duo   to   peaceable   and    willing 

*  Itucurd  Olhco  MSS.,  Culonial  Series,  vol.  xi. 

3-2 


It 


36 


OUR  FIRST  IVJiST  INDIAN  COLONY. 


colonization.  In  1G57,  between  seven  and  eight  thousand 
Scots,  taken  prisoners  at  the  battle  of  Worcester,  were  '  sold 
as  slaves  to  the  plantations  of  the  American  isles,*  many  of 
them  being  consigned  to  Barbados  ;  and,  among  others  of 
like  sort,  seventy  persons  detected  in  the  Salisbury  plot  of 
1G66,  including  divines,  officers,  and  gentlemen,  vv-erc  sold  to 
Barbados  for  1,500  pounds  of  sugar  a  piece.  These  unfor- 
tunate captives,  it  was  said,  were  'bought  and  sold  from  one 
planter  to  anotlier,  or  attached  like  horses  or  beasts  for  the 
debts  of  their  masters,  being  whipped  at  the  whipping-post 
as  rogues,  and  sleeping  in  styes  worse  than  hogs  in 
Englovud.'''^  The  white  slaves  naturally  resented  such 
treatment,  and  more  than  one  insurrection  was  organized 
between  them  and  their  black  fellow-sufferers  in  the  hope  of 
securing  a  more  humane  policy.  These  were  easily  put 
down,  but  the  laws  of  humanity  were  gradually  recognised 
so  far  as  the  English  bondsmen  were  coiicerned.  They 
were  admitted  to  share  the  freedom  of  their  neighbours,  and 
then  the  whole  brunt  of  persecution  fell  upon  the  negroes, 
towards  whom  the  civilization  of  those  days  accorded  no 
more  generosity  than  was  needed  to  keep  them  alive  and 
make  them  profitable  chattels. 

A  vigorous  traae  existed  between  Barbados  and  the  mother 
country  during  the  time  of  the  Commonw^ealth  and  after- 
wards. In  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century  about  a 
hundred  vessels  came  to  the  island  every  year,  laden  with 
emigrants,  slaves,  cattle,  tools,  clothing,  and  European  pro- 
duce of  all  sorts  ;  and  their  homeward  cargoes  consisted  of 
indigo,  cotton,  wool,  tobacco,  sugar,  and  other  commodities 
raised  by  the  industry  of  the  inhabitants.  These  inhabi- 
tants, reduced  to  submission  by  Sir  George  Ayscue,  proved 
willing  subjects  of  the  Commonwealth.  They  even  in  1652 
sought  permission  to  send  two  representatives  to  sit  in  the 
English  Parliament,   and,   though   this    was  not   granted, 


*  '  r.nrbaclofi  ^Merchandize,  .a  rotition    to  rarliament,   piiiittd  in  tlic 
eleventh  year  of  England's  liberty,  lUi>'J.' 


THE  PROGRESS  OF  RARRADOS. 


37 


usan(T. 
1  '  sold 
my  of 
Lcrs  of 
plot  of 
sold  to 
iinfor- 
3m  ono 
for  the 
ng-post 
lOgs   in 


id  such 
'ganized 

hope  of 

sily  put 

cognised 

They 

)urs,  and 

negroes, 
Drded  no 

live  and 

jc  mother 
|nd  after- 
about  a 
Iden  with 
jiean  pro- 
Lsistcd  of 
fiodities 
ic  inhabi- 
|e,  proved 
ii  in  1G52 
sit  in  the 
granted, 

Lud  in  tl>^ 


their  interests  were  well  looked  after  by  the  authorities  at 
home.  Soon  after  the  Restoration,  Lord  Willougliby  was 
sent  by  Charles  the  Second  to  resume  his  governorship  of  an 
island  that  had  thriven  mightily  during  his  absence. 

^Yith  ^Villoughby's  return  began  a  new  period  in  the 
^  history  of  Barbados.  From  16G3  it  and  the  other  Caribbean 
Islands  were  taken  out  of  the  hands  of  the  old  proprietors, 
and  placed  under  the  direct  authority  of  the  Crown.  The 
original  patentees  were  grudgingly  compensated,  and  the 
planters  were  established  as  independent  proprietors,  subject 
to  their  paying  a  tax  of  4  J,  per  cent,  upon  the  value  of  all 
their  exports.  As  this  tax  yielded  more  than  £6,000  a  year, 
the  prosperity  of  the  island  is  apparent. 

Lord  Willoughby's  second  government  of  Barbados,  wise 
and  generous,  was  brief.  In  1GG6  he  conducted  a  lleet  of 
seventeen  vessels  to  punish  the  French  and  Dutch,  who  had 
made  numerous  aggressions  upon  the  Caribbean  Islands 
claimed  by  Great  Britain  ;  but  a  terrible  hurricane  overtook 
him  off  Guadeloupe.  He  and  the  crews  of  fifteen  of  the 
ships  v\'ere  lost. 

These  hurricanes  and  the  attendant  rains  were  the  chief 
V  hindrances  to  full  development  of  the  resources  of  Bar- 
bados. In  lG7o,  a  storm  of  unexampled  magnitude  devas- 
tated nearly  half  the  island.  A  century  later,  in  1780, 
another  brought  death  to  more  than  4,000  persons,  and 
destroyed  more  than  a  million  pounds'  worth  of  property. 
J  luge  guns  were  dislodged  and  destroyed  by  the  force  of 
winds  and  waves.  It  is  recorded  that  one  twelve-pounder 
thus  travelled  140  yards.  The  fertility  of  the  soil,  however, 
and  the  industry  of  the  inhabitants,  augmented  by  a  steady 
importation  of  slaves,  caused  the  periodical  injuries  of  this 
nature  to  be  easily  retrieved.  In  1G7G  the  island  contained 
20,000  nhites  and  32,000  negroes.  The  Ihiglish  population 
has  never  greatly  surpassed  that  limit,  but  the  black  and 
.coloured  population  has  been  nearly  always  on  the  increase, 
.and  this  in  spite  of  the  excessive  loss  of  life  which  is  a 
necessary  result  of  slavery.     Through  more  than  a  century 


!B 


m 


38 


OUR  F/nST  ir/CST  LVD/AN  COLONY. 


about  4,000  slaves  were  imported  every  year.  Of  these, 
some  8,000  supplied  the  place  of  predecessors  killed  beforo 
their  time.  The  actual  increase  of  the  black  population  was 
less  than  1,000  a  year. 

Those  figures  alone,  if  such  evidence  was  needed,  would 
sullico  to  show  the  evil  work  of  slavery.  This,  the  great 
blot  in  the  history  of  our  West  Indian  possessions,  and  per- 
haps the  chief  cause  of  their  deterioration  in  modern  times, 
will  receive  fuller  illustration  in  later  pages.  In  Barbados 
it  seems,  during  the  seventeenth  century,  to  have  assumed 
its  worst  and  most  degrading  forms.  The  early  colonists, 
whether  going  out  of  their  own  accord,  or  as  exiles  by 
decree  of  the  Parliamentary  authorities,  were  mainly  of  the 
Eoyalist  party.  Imbued  with  aristo  ^nliic  and  domineering 
tendencies  at  home  and  in  their  relations  with  other  Eng- 
lishmen of  meaner  birth,  they  were  unable  to  make  generous 
asc  of  the  power  which  they  possessed  over  their  negro 
bondsmen.  Down  to  1805,  the  utmost  punishment  assigned 
by  law  for  the  murder  of  a  black  man  w^as  a  fine  of  £1 1 
sterling,  and  so  niany  diiliculties  were  in  the  way  of  convic- 
tion, even  if  the  murder  were  sudden  and  patent  to  all,  that 
the  law  was  hardly  ever  enforced.  No  penalty  at  all  was 
allotted  to  slower  and  more  cruel  killing  by  overwork,  and 
castigation  for  failure  in  completing  it.  The  slave's  only 
defence  against  the  ill-treatment  of  his  nuistcr  was  in  his 
value  as  a  b^ast  of  labour,  and  so  long  as  dpw  victims  could 
be  easily  and  cheaply  procured  from  the  coast  of  Africa,  it 
was  often  most  economical  to  work  the  old  ones  to  prema- 
ture death.  It  was  poor  consolation  to  the  negroes  to 
reflect,  if  they  were  not  too  ignorant  for  even  this  reflection, 
that  the  cruelties  heaped  upon  them  reacted  upon  their 
masters  and  produced  their  own  degradation. 

Those  masters,  however,  reaped  great  profits ;  and  during 
the  seventeenth  century  Barbados,  hardly  larger  than  the 
Isle  of  Wight,  w^as,  next  to  the  settlements  on  the  continent 
of  America,  the  most  important  colonial  possession  of  Great 
Britain.     The  wise  rule  inaugurated  by  Lord  Willoughby, 


Of  those, 
ed  bcforo 
ation  was 

ed,  would 
tlio  great 
,  and  per- 
2vn  times, 
Barbados 
assumed 
colonists, 
exiles  by 
nly  of  the 
mineering 
bher  Eng- 
3  generous 
leir  negro 
it  assigned 
ne  of  £11 
of  convic- 
bo  all,  that 
at  all  was 
L'work,  and 
lave's  only 
was  in  his 
!tims  could 
f  Africa,  it 
to  prema- 
negroes  to 
5  rellection, 
upon  their 


77//;  r/WGR/:SS  OF  BARBADOS.  35 

and  carried  on  for  the  most  pait  by  other  governors,  under 
Avhoso  adnnmstration  there  occurred    no  special  incidents 
that  need  to  be  recorded,  aided  it  in  the  path  of  wealth 
and  rendered  it  alike  famous  a.,  a  i-csort  of  adventurers  and 
as  a  source  of  gam  to  the  mother  countiy. 


i 


I 


IH 


m 


and  during 
jr  than  the 
le  continent 
ion  of  Great 
^Villoughby, 


CHAPTER  III. 


JA:\rAICA   AND   THE   BUCCANEERS. 


COr.UMBUS  TN'  .TA:\rAI('A  — ITS  OOVKRXArKNT  l',V  TIIK  SPANTAnOS— CROlNFWELr.'.S 
C'()N(il'i:sT — TIIK  :MAU00N.S — TllK  JUX'CANICKUS — TIIK  iOCri.OITS  OF  SIU 
IlKMtY  MOUlJAN— THE  C'ON'XKCTION  Ol'  JAMAICA  WITrl  TIIK  UUCANKERS  — 
ITS  KAULY  riJOOllKSS— THE  EAUTHQUAKE  OF  1092,  AND  HUBSEgUENT 
DISASTKHS.       [151)15-1712.] 

HE  early  history  of  Jamaica  —  *  the  island  of 
streams,'  as  its  native  title,  '  Chamaika,'  imjiliccl 
— differs  widely  from  that  of  Barbados.  This 
island,  being  about  a  twentieth  of  the  size  of 
Great  Britain,  is  nearly  forty  times  as  large  as  its 
eastern  rival.  It  was  discovered  by  Columbus  in  149'1,  and 
in  it,  being  driven  thitlier  by  a  storm  in  1503,  he  took  refuge 
for  more  than  a  year  from  the  ingratitude  of  King  Ferdinand 
of  Spain  and  the  treachery  of  his  agents,  barely  supported 
by  the  charity  of  the  gentle  Indians  upon  whom  his  great 
exploit  was  to  bring  misery  and  extermination.  '  Let  the 
earth,  and  every  soul  in  it  that  loves  justice  and  mercy,  weep 
for  me,'  he  wrote  from  his  place  of  exile ;  *  and  you,  O 
glorified  saints  of  God,  that  know  my  innocence  and  see  my 
sufferings  here,  have  mercy  !  For,  though  this  present  age 
is  envious  or  obdurate,  surely  those  that  are  to  come  will 
pity  me,  when  they  are  told  that  Christopher  Columbus 
rendered  greater  services  than  ever  mortal  man  did  to  prince 
or  kingdom,  yet  was  left  to  perish,  without  being  charged 
with  the  least  crime,  in  poverty  and  misery,  all  but  his 
chains  being  taken  from  him,  so  that  he  who  gave  to  Spain 
another  world,  had  not  safety  in  it,  nor  yet  a  cottage  for 
himself.     And  surely,'  he  added,  with  prophetic  truth, '  such 


SPA  NISH  J 1  'ON  A'  /.y  J  A  MA  ICA . 


41 


^OM  WELLS 
S  OF  Hill 
'ANKKRS  — 


sland  of 
'  implied 
)S.     This 
e  size  of 
rge  as  its 
494,  and 
k  refugo 
erdinand 
|upported 
lis  great 
Let  the 


[cy,  weep 


you, 


O 


see  my 

jent  age 

)me  will 

)lumbus 

prince 

charged 

but  his 

0  Spain 

Itage  for 

. ' such 


cruelty  and  ingratitude  will  bring  down  the  wrath  of  Heaven, 
so  that  the  wealth  I  have  discovered  shall  be  the  means  of 
stirring  up  mankind  to  revenge  and  rapine,  and  the  Spanish 
nation  hereafter  suffer  for  what  envious,  malicious,  and  un- 
grateful people  do  now.' 

Jamaica,  not  having  the  gold  which  tlio  Spanish  adven- 
turers chiefly  sought,  was  not  troubled  by  them  for  a  few 
years  after  Columbus's  return  to  Spain  ;  and  when  in  1509 
his  son  Diego  began  to  colonize  it,  the  governor  whom  ho 
appointed,  Juan  de  Esquimel,  proved  more  merciful  than 
most  of  his  countrymen.  *  The  affairs  of  Jamaica  went  on 
prosperously,'  says  the  historian  llerrera,  '  because,  Juan  de 
Esquinn^l  having  brought  the  natives  to  submission  without 
any  ell'asion  of  blood,  tliey  lu  soured  in  planting  cotton  and 
raising  other  connnodities  which  yielded  great  profit.'  His 
successors,  however,  were  of  a  different  disposition.  They 
practised  in  Jamaica  cruelties  as  harsh  as  those  by  which 
the  neighbouring  islands  were  depopulated,  and  with  like 
result.  When  Columbus  visited  the  island  its  inhabitants, 
supposed  to  be  more  than  sixty  thousand  in  number,  were  *  a 
tractable,  docile  people  ;  equal  to  any  employment ;  modest 
in  their  manners ;  of  a  quick  and  ready  genius  in  matters 
of  trafiic,  in  which  they  greatly  excelled  the  neighbouring 
islanders ;  more  devoted  also  to  the  mechanic  arts ;  more 
industrious  ;  and  surpassing  them  all  in  acuteness  of  under- 
standing.'* 13y  1558  they  were  nearly  all  killed  out,  and 
what  might  have  been  a  thriving  possession  of  Spain  had  for 
its  only  tenants  a  scattered  population  of  degraded  negroes 
and  of  enervated  Europeans,  idle  in  everything  but  the 
exercise  of  their  evil  passions.  Sir  Anthony  Shirley,  with  a 
small  force,  pillaged  the  island  in  1596,  and  about  forty 
years  afterwards  it  was  treated  in  the  same  manner  by 
Colonel  Jackson.  In  1G55  it  contained  only  some  twelve  or 
fourteen  hundred  Spaniards,  and  o.bout  an  equal  number  of 
negro  slaves. 

In  that  year  it  was  captured  by  a  force  of  seven  thousand 

'••  Loni^^  'History  of  Jamaicii,'  vol.  iil.,  p.  l*."!. 


■    (.1 

r 


:li 


i! 


42 


JAMAICA  AND  THE  BUCCANEERS. 


Englishmen  sent  out  by  Cromwell.     Many  Puritans  resorted 
to  it,  both  from  England  and  from  Virginia  and  the  other 
settlements  in  America,  during  the  Commonwealth  and  after 
the  restoration  of  Charles  the  Second  ;  but  its  progress  was 
not  at  first  very  rapid.     Placed  by  Cromwell  under  military 
rule,  the  soldiers  refused  to  become  colonists.     The  other 
residents  quarrelled  with  them,  with  one  ai-> other,  and  with 
the  ,' authorities  at  home ;    and  all  were  harassed  by   the 
guerilla  warfare  kept  up  by  the  negro  slaves  of  the  Spaniards, 
who,  taking  refuge  in  the  mountains,  and  there  organizing 
themselves  into  a  fierce  body  of  lawless  warriors,  came  to  be 
known  as  maroons.     '  Their  sudden  and  unlooked-for  eman- 
cipation,' it  has  been  said  of  these  maroons,  '  bestowed  by 
no  generous  impulse  or  deliberate  act  of  high  principle,  but 
simply   resulting   from   circumstances  over   which   neither 
slaves  nor  slave-holders  had  any  control,  produced  its  natural 
results.     The  inestimable  prize  of  freedom  they  resolved  to 
hold  at  all  hazards,  and  though  a  portion  of  them  accepted 
the  offers  of  pardon  made   by  the  English,  the  majority 
viewed  all  friendly  overtures  in  the  light  of  treacherous  en- 
deavours to  entrap  them  again  into  bondage.     They  and 
their  descendants  maintained  for  nearly  a  century  and  a 
half  their  position  among  the  mountain  fastnesses,  whence, 
with  occasional  intervals  of  peace,  they  harassed  the  settlers 
by  their  predatory  expeditions,  often  attended  with  blood- 
shed, undeterred  by  the  cruel  punishment  which  attended 
them  if  captured  in  open  hostilities,  or  tracked  to  their  caves 
by  bloodhounds.     These  latter  auxiliaries  were  frequently 
employed  in  chasing  the  original  maroons,  as  well  as  run- 
aways from  the  negroes  imported  by  the  new  colonists,  by 
whom  their  numbers  were  subsequently  augmented.'* 

Another  race  of  lawless  warriors  was  connected  at  this 
time  with  Jamaica,  and,  while  hindering  its  peaceable 
development,  helped  to  make  it  an  important  possession  of 
Great  Britain.  These  were  the  Buccaneers,  successors  to 
the  piratical  adventurers  in  the  West  Indies,  of  whom  Sir 

*  Montgomery  Martin,  '  The  West  Indies,'  p.  22. 


t 

s 

tl 

iv 


MAROONS  AND  BUCCANEERS. 


43 


jortecl 
other 
I  after 
5S  was 
ilitary 
other 
a  with 
)y   the 
niards, 
mizing 
10  to  be 
•  eman- 
wed  by 
pie,  but 
neither 
natural 
)lved  to 
iccepted 
majority 
rous  en- 
hoy  and 
y  and  a 
whence, 
)  settlers 
h  blood- 
attended 
leir  caves 
•equently 
as  run- 
niists,  by 

d  at  this 
peaceable 
session  of 
lessors  to 
,vhom  Sii' 


Francis  Drake  was  the  first  great  leader.  Drake's  piracy  was 
prompted  by  patriotic  zeal  for  the  overthrow  of  Spain  and 
Spanish  tyranny,  even  more  than  by  mere  desire  of  gain. 
Gain,  not  patriotism,  chiefly  actuated  those  who  followed  his 
example. 

Early  in  the  seventeenth  century  the  buccaneers*  started 
a  new  trade  for  themselves,  or  gave  a  new  form  to  the  old 
trade  of  smuggling  and  piracy,  by  making  organized  depre- 
dations upon  the  Spanish  islands  of  Cuba  and  Hispaniola, 
and  the  yet  richer  territories  of  Spain  on  the  mainland  of 
America.      Principally   English,   they    received    numerous 
recruits  from  France  and   Holland.      Nationalities   were 
abandoned  in  the  commonwealth  which  they  formed  under 
the  name  of  Brethren  of  the  Coast,  in  which  the  customs 
necessary  to  their  calling  induced  the  formation  of  something 
like  a  special  code  of  laws.     *  Property,'  we  are  told,  *  so  far 
as  regarded  the  means  of  sustenance,  whether  obtained  in 
the  chase  or  by  pillage,  was  in  common  among  this  hardy 
brotherhood ;  and,  as  they  had  no  domestic  ties — neither 
wife  nor  child,  brother  nor  sister,  being  known  among  the 
buccaneers — the  want  of  family  relations  was  supjplied  by 
strict  comradeship,  one  partner  occasionally  attending  to 
liousehold  duties  while  the  other  was  engaged  in  the  chase. 
Their  chief  virtue  was  courage,  which,  urged  by  desperation, 
\\.is  often  carried  to  an  extreme  unparalleled  among  other 
warlike  ass'  ciations.     The  fear  of  the  gallows,  which  has 
frequently   converted   a   thief  into  a  murderer,  made  the 
buccaneer  a  hero  and  a  savage.     Hardihood,  the  habit  and 
power  of  extreme  endurance,  might  also,  if  exerted  in  a 
better  cause,  be  reckoned  among  the  virtues  of  the  bucca- 
neers, had  not  their  long  seasons  of  entire  privation  been 

*  The  term  'buccaneer'  v/as  adopted  from  the  Carib  Indians,  who  called 
the  flesh  wlilcli  they  prepared  honcaii,  and  gave  to  the  hut  in  which  it  was 
slowly  dried  and  smoked  on  wooden  hurdles  the  same  appellation.  To  the 
title  by  which  the  desperadoes  of  England  were  known,  the  French  pre- 
ferred '  flibustier,'  said  to  bu  a  corruptitm  of  the  V^n^^Vmhwovd  freebooter. — 
'  Lives  and  Voyages  of  Drake,  Cavendish,  and  Dampier,  including  tlie 
History  of  the  Buccaneers  '  (lSo"2),  p.  230. 


1* 


I  \\ 


44 


JAMAICA  AND  THE  BUCCANEERS. 


always  followed  by  scenes  of  the  most  brutal  excess.  Their 
grand  principle,  the  one  thing  needful  to  their  existence,  was 
fidelity.  As  their  associations  were  voluntary,  their  engage- 
ments never  extended  beyond  the  cruise  or  enterprise  on 
liand,  though  they  were  frequently  renewed.  The  ablest, 
the  most  hrave,  active,  fortunate,  and  intriguing  of  tlieir 
number  was  elected  their  commander ;  but  all  the  fighting 
men  appear  to  have  assisted  at  councils.  The  same  power 
which  chose  their  leader  could  displace  him,  and  this  was 
frequently  done,  cither  from  caprice  or  expediency.  They 
sometimes  settled  personal  quarrels  by  duel ;  but  offences 
against  the  fraternity  were  visited  by  different  punishments, 
as,  in  extreme  cases,  death,  abandonment  on  a  desert  island, 
or  simply  banishment  from  the  society.  A  party  having 
agreed  upon  a  cruise,  the  day  and  place  for  embarkation 
were  fixed,  and  every  man  repaired  on  board  the  ship  with 
a  specific  quantity  of  powder  and  shot.  The  next  concern 
was  to  procure  provisions,  which  consisted  mostly  of  pork. 
INIany  of  the  Spaniards  raised  large  herds  of  swine  for  the 
supply  of  the  planters,  and  from  their  yards  abundance  was 
procured  with  no  trouble  save  that  in  which  the  ferocious 
buccaneers  delighted,  robbery  often  accompanied  by  murder. 
Turtle  slightly  salted  was  another  article  of  the  food  whicli 
they  stored,  and  for  beeves  and  wild  hogs  they  trusted  to 
their  iire-arms.  Bread  they  seldom  tasted,  and  at  sea  ne\er 
thought  about.  Of  this  food  every  man  ate  generally  twice 
a  day,  or  at  his  own  pleasure,  and  without  limitation,  there 
being  in  this  respect  no  distinction  between  the  commander 
and  the  meanest  seaman.  The  vessel  fairly  victualled,  a 
final  council  was  held,  which  determined  the  destination  of 
the  cruise  and  the  place  of  operations  ;  and  articles  wero 
generally  drawn  up  and  subscribed,  which  regulated  the 
division  of  the  spoils.  The  carpenter,  the  sail-maker,  the 
surgeon,  and  the  commander,  were  in  the  first  place  paid  out 
of  the  common  stock.  Wounds  were  next  considered,  the 
value  of  the  right  arm,  the  most  useful  member  of  the 
buccaneer's  body,  being  reckoned  equal  to  six  slaves  :  the 


THE  ir.l  VS  OF  THE  nUCCAXEERS. 


45 


Their 
e,  was 

Qgage- 
■iso  on 
ablest, 
[  their 
ighting 
power 
is  was 
They 
iffences 
Linents, 
island, 
having 
rkation 
ip  \vith 
concern 
Df  pork, 
for  the 
ice  was 
rocious 
nurcler. 
which 
steel  to 
la  ne\er 
y  twice 
,  there 
iiander 
id,  a 
tition  of 
s  wero 
,ed  the 
er,  the 
aid  out 
ed,  the 
of   the 
:  the 


eye  and  linger  had  the  same  value,  which  was  one  slave. 
The  remainder  was  equally  shared,  save  that  tlic  captain 
had  five  shares,  and  his  mate  two.  The  first  maxim  in  the 
eode  of  the  buccaneer,  dictated  by  necessity,  was,  "  No  prey, 
no  pay."  In  their  cruises,  the  freebooters  often  put  into 
remote  harbours  to  careen  or  refit  their  ships,  to  obtain  fruits 
and  fish,  to  lie  in  wait  for  the  Spanish  traders,  and  to 
plunder  either  natives  or  Spaniards.  The  former  they  some- 
times carried  away,  selling  the  men  as  slaves,  while  the 
women  wero  compelled  to  labour  among  those  of  the  bucca- 
neers who  followed  the  chase.  Their  dress  consisted  of  a 
shirt  dipped  in  the  blood  of  the  cattle  hunted  and  killed  ; 
trousers  prepared  in  tJie  same  rude  manner ;  buskins  with- 
out stockings  ;  a  cap  with  a  small  front ;  and  a  leathern 
girdle,  into  which  were  stuck  knives,  sabres,  and  pistols. 
The  bloody  garments,  though  attributed  to  design,  wero 
probably  among  the  hunters  the  effect  of  chance  and  sloven- 
hncss.'* 

Of  that  sort  were  the  strange  adventurers  who  converted 
Jamaica  into  a  profitable  place  of  resort  for  Englishmen.  At 
first  they  pursued  their  lawless  calling  in  little  bands,  indepen- 
dent of  one  another,  and  made  their  homes,  in  which  to  pass 
tlicir  time  of  leisure  and  prepare  their  houcan,  or  preserved 
meat,  in  such  nooks  and  corners  of  the  Spanish  Main  or 
West  Indian  Islands  as  were  least  likely  to  be  visited  by  the 
Spanish  warships  tliat  vainly  sought  to  put  them  down.  As 
tliey  grew  in  numbers  and  found  it  important  to  make  more 
organized  resistance  to  the  enemy  that  came  to  attack  them 
in  organized  ways,  they  entered  into  closer  associations  with 
one  another,  and  established  one  or  more  centres  of  action. 
The  little  island  of  Tortuga,  between  Cuba  and  Florida,  was 
first  chosen  by  them.  There  for  many  years  they  built  their 
huts  and  spent  their  gains  in  every  kind  of  wild  excess,  and 
tlicre  a  sort  of  colony  was  formed  by  the  irregular  traders 
and  attendants  who  crowded  to  supply  their  wants.     But  at 

*  'Lives  and  Vuyages  uf  Drake,'  etc.,  pp.  2l1C-2-jO. 


m 


m 


§'i 


<   ! 


Il«: 


1 


46 


JAMAICA  AND  THE  nUCCAXKERS. 


Icn^tli,  while  the  bravest  of  tlic  buccaneers  wore  at  sea,  a 
formidable  attack  was  made  by  Spain  upon  the  settlement, 
and  all  its  rude  civilization  was  wasted  amid  terrible  blood- 
shed ;  and  soon  after  that  the  island  was  seized  by  Trance, 
which  refused  to  countenance  any  but  French  freebooters. 
The  English  rovers  had  to  seek  another  haunt,  and,  while 
they  were  seeking,  Ciom well's  force,  under  General  Ven- 
ables,  took  possession  of  Jamaica.  Thither  a  great  many  of 
the  buccaneers  at  once  went,  and  it  was  mainly  by  their 
assistance  that  two  powerful  attempts  to  recover  the  island 
for  Spain,  made  in  1G57  and  1658,  were  rendered  utterly 
futile.  It  was  partly  in  gratitude  for  their  aid,  partly 
because  their  further  protection  might  be  valuable,  and  partly 
because  ho  secretly  sympathized  with  their  pursuits,  that 
Colonel  D'Oyley,  the  first  English  governor,  allowed  them, 
from  that  time,  to  make  Jamaica  a  regular  place  of  resort. 
Their  crowd  of  satellites  came  with  them,  and  the  island  was 
at  once  depraved  and  enriched  by  their  booty.  We  are  told 
by  Exquemelin,  the  historian  of  the  buccaneers,  himself  one 
of  their  number,  how  one  especially  used  to  delight  in  placing 
a  pipe  of  wine  in  the  streets  of  Port  Koyal,  and  then,  with  a 
pistol  in  his  hand,  compel  every  passer-by  to  drink  with  him. 
'  At  other  times  he  would  do  the  same  with  barrels  of  ale 
and  beer;  and  very  often  with  both  his  hands  he  would 
throw  these  liquors  about  the  streets,  and  wet  the  clothes  of 
such  as  passed  by,  heedless  whether  he  spoilt  their  apparel 
or  not,  were  thev  men  or  women.' 

The  greatest  of  the  English  buccaneers  was  Captain  Henry 
Morgan.  The  son  of  a  Welsh  yeoman,  he  had  gone  out  in 
his  youth  to  settle  in  Barbados.  There  he  was  forced  into 
slavery  for  some  years,  until,  on  his  escape,  he  joined  the 
buccaneers.  By  his  wit  and  daring  he  soon  became  a 
favourite  among  them,  and  in  the  end  he  was  recognised 
leader  of  a  large  section  of  the  fraternity.  By  Colonel 
D'Oyley  he  was  encouraged  in  his  marauding  expeditions, 
and  as  most  of  the  treasure  acquired  in  those  expeditions 
was  spent  in  Jamaica,  the  island  derived  as  much  profit  as 


.S7A'  liEX/n'  M  ORG  AX. 


47 


5Ga,  a 

mcnt, 

bloocl- 

rancc, 

)otors. 
while 

L  Ven- 

any  of 

f  their 
island 

utterly 
partly 
partly 

s,  that 
them, 
resort. 

nd  was 

ire  told 

5elf  one 

placing 
with  a 

thhim. 

of  ale 

would 

thes  of 

apparel 

Henry 
out  in 
ed  into 
led  the 
ame  a 
Dgnised 
Dolonel 
ilitions, 
ditions 
ofit  as 


could  result  from  tlic  extravagance  and  debauchery  of  the 
adventurers. 

I^Iorgan's  most  famous  exploits  were  in  1G70  and  1671. 
Witli  nine  vessels,  and  less  than  live  hundred  men,  ho  pro- 
ceeded, in  tlie  first  summer,  to  surprise  the  rich  and  strongly 
fortilicd  Spanish  city  of  Porto  ]5cllo,  near  tlie  Isthmus  of 
Panama.  In  this  he  was  successful,  and  after  a  fortnight's 
brutal  riot  in  the  captured  town,  he  took  back  a  great  store 
of  money,  and  vast  quantities  of  silks,  cloths,  and  other 
articles  for  sale  in  Jamaica.  With  so  nmch  of  the  proceeds 
as  were  not  needed  for  the  further  revels  there  enjoyed,  he 
equipped  a  fleet  four  times  as  strong  for  a  bolder  raid  on 
the  Spanish  possessions.  He  sacked  several  smaller  towns, 
and  then,  with  half  his  men,  advanced  by  land  to  Panama, 
the  centre  of  Spanish  colonial  wealth,  defended  by  a  garrison 
nearly  four  thousand  strong.  He  took  no  food  with  him,  and 
little  was  to  be  found  upon  the  way.  '  Happy  was  he,'  we  read, 
'  who  had  reserved  since  morn  any  small  piece  of  leather 
wlicreof  to  make  his  supper,  drinking  after  it  a  good  draught 
of  water  for  his  greatest  comfort.'  But  the  buccaneers  knew 
how  to  fast  as  well  as  how  to  feast.  After  ter.  days  of 
hungry  marching  they  reached  Panama.  A  short  night's 
rest  was  secured  before  they  were  detected  by  the  enemy, 
and  before  the  next  night  came  the  Spaniards  were  routed, 
and  half  the  assailing  force — the  other  half  having  been 
killed  in  the  battle — had  gained  possession  of  the  city. 
Most  of  the  inhabitants  fled  from  it,  and,  by  design  or  acci- 
dent, its  cedar  houses  were  set  on  lire,  so  that  a  part  of  the 
treasure  was  lost ;  but  enough  remained  to  satisfy  the 
rapacity  of  the  leader  and  those  who  were  not  tricked  out  of 
their  share.  It  was  conveyed  to  Jamaica,  and  there  squan- 
dered like  the  previous  booty. 

After  that  Morgan  played  the  buccaneer  no  more.  Peace 
between  England  and  Spain  had  been  made  during  his 
absence,  and  it  was  strictly  enforced  by  a  new  governor, 
Lord  Jonn  Yaughan,  who  had  been  sent  out.  Morgan  settled 
down  as  a  planter,  until,  having  won  the  favour  of  Charles 


t! 


!=; 


•<    I 


{S-i 


{.:. 


.}8 


J.IMA/CA  AM)  Till-:  llUCCAM'.r.RS. 


till)  S(!coii(l,  lu)  was  kiii^'litod  and  inado  dcputy-f^ovonior  of 
.Juinaica.  A  youn^'ur  planter,  then  in  tlio  island,  dcstinod 
to  become  ill  turn  a  l)ncf;anecr,  \vas  tlie  famous  William 
])ampicr.  But  his  exploits  have  very  little  to  do  with  our 
present  subject. 

J)urin|^  the  tliirty  years  following  the  appointment  of 
Colonel  D'Oyley  as  governor  of  Jamaica,  and  the  confer- 
ment of  its  constitution  by  Charles  the  Second,  in  KJGl,  the 
island  made  rapid  progress.  In  10G2  it  contained  3,Go;J 
I'higlish  inhabitants,  and  552  negro  slaves.  In  1G73  the 
white  population  had  risen  to  7,7G8,  the  black  to  0,501.  And 
it  continued  to  increase  almost  as  quickly,  although  tho 
tide  of  I]nglish  immigration  was  by  no  means  equal  to  that 
occasioned  by  tho  working  of  the  slave-trade.  Planters 
settled  in  nearly  every  district  of  tho  beautiful  and  fertile 
colony, and  towns  arose  as  marts fo-  "'sproducc,and still  more 
as  haunts  for  the  traders  who  pr^  ^  most  by  tho  achieve- 
ments of  the  buccaneers.  Spanish  Town — as  the  old  capital 
of  the  Spaniards,  known  by  them  as  St.  Jago  de  la  Vega, 
was  called — continued  to  be  tho  centre  of  government ;  but 
the  busiest  seat  of  commerce  was  Port  Royal,  built  on  the 
edge  of  a  coral  reef  which,  with  the  neighbouring  mainland, 
formed  the  splendid  bay  that  is  now  termed  Kingston  Har- 
bour. '  Jamaica,'  says  one  of  its  historians,  '  had  at  this 
time  made  marvellous  progress  in  respect  to  population  and 
agricultural  resources  ;  but,  in  a  moral  point  of  view,  its 
condition  was  truly  deplorable.  The  strife,  vice,  and  misery 
attendant  on  slavery  became  early  manifest.  The  attempts 
of  the  wretched  captives  to  regain  their  freedom,  and  the 
predatory  incursions  of  the  maroons,  even  then  scourged  the 
colonists.  Port  Eoyal  itself  united  to  more  than  regal  opu- 
lence the  worst  vices  and  the  lowest  depravity  that  ever 
disgraced  a  seaport ;  nor  could  anything  else  be  expected 
in  a  city  whose  most  honoured  denizens  w  ■'°,  buccaneers, 
whose  most  welcome  visitors  were  slave-trader,.  '* 

A  terrible  earthquake,  which  brought  retribution  upon  Port 
*  Montsroinerv  Martin,  p.  20. 


i 


PK OGRESS  AM)  DISASTKR. 


49 


nor  (if 
;stiiio(l 
,'illiiuii 
ith  our 

lent  of 
confor- 
Gl,  tho 
I  a, 05;} 
)73  the 
1.    And 
igli  tho 
to  that 
banters 
I  fertile 
ill  more 
ichievG- 
l  capital 
a  Vega, 
nt ;  but 
on  the 
ainland, 
ni  Har- 
at  this 
ion  and 
iew,  its 
misery 
bttempts 
land  the 
rgcd  the 
gal  opu- 
liat  ever 
expected 
Icaneers, 

hon  Port 


Royal  and  tlio  whole  island,  furnishcg  a  tragic  close  to  tho 
story  of  ils  connection  with  the  buccaneers.     *  On  tiie  incn- 
ing  of  the  7th  of  June,  iO'J2,'  says  tiio  historian  just  cited, 
'  the  governor  and  council  were  met  in  session,  the  wharves 
were  laden  with  bales  of  tho  richest  merchandise,  the  mar- 
kets and  stores  displayed  tho  glittering  spoils  of  Mexico  and 
Peru,  and  the  streets  were  thronged  with  people,  when  tho 
clear  and  serene  sky  became  overshadowed  by  partial  dark- 
ness, broken  by  faint  gleams  of  red  and  purple,  and  a  tre- 
mendous roar,  like  that  of  distant  thunder,  broke  from  tho 
base  of  tho  mountains,  and  reverberated  through  the  valleys 
to  the  beach,  while  the  sea,  impelled  by  the  same  mighty 
convulsion,  rose  in  a  few  minutes  live  fatlioms  high  over 
the  houses  of  tho  devoted  town.     Tlio  scene  was  appalling 
beyond  description.     Shrieks  and  lamentations  rent  ihe  air. 
Mangled  corpses  floated  on  the  waters,  or  were  Hung  up- 
wards by  the  violence  of  the  shocks.     Although  there  was 
no  wind,  billows  rose  and  fell  with  such  violence  that  the 
vessels  in  the  harbour  broke  from  their  moovings.     One  of 
tliem,  the  Sivaii  frigate,  was  forced  over  the  tops  of  the 
sunken  houses,  and  afforded  a  means  of  escape  to  many 
persons.     Several  individuals  were  wonderfully  preserved, 
being  swallowed  up  during  the  awful  concussion,  and  thrown 
back  again  through  an  aperture  quite  distinct  from   that 
which  had  yawned  to  receive  them,  without  sustaining  any- 
material  injury.     Of  the  whole  three  thousand  houses,  about 
two  hundred,  with  the  fort,  remained  uninjured.     The  whole 
island  felt  the  shock,  and  shared  the  disastrous  el'fects  of  a 
visitation   which   happily   stands  alone   in   tho    annals   of 
Jamaica ;  no  other,  before  or  since,  having  been  known  to 
compare  with  it.     Chains  of  hills  were  riven  asunder  ;  new 
..channels  formed  for  the  rivers ;  mountains  dissolved  with 
a  mighty  crash,  burying  alive  the  people  of  the  adjacent 
valleys.     Whole  settlements  sank  into  the  bowels  of  tho 
earth.     Plantations  were  removed  cji  viassc,  and  all  tho 
sugar-works   destroyed.     In   fact,   the   whole   outline   was 
^rawn  afresh,  and  the  elevation  of  the  surface  considerably 


(I  t 


(: 


50 


JAMAICA  AND  THE  BUCCANEERS. 


diminished.  The  sentence  of  desolation,  however,  was  yet 
but  partially  fulfilled.  A  noxious  miasm,  generated  by  the 
shoals  of  putrefying  bodies  that  floated  about  the  harbour, 
or  lay  in  heaps  in  the  suburbs,  slew  three  thousand  of  the 
survivors.  That  so  fearful  a  warning  miglit  not  be  forgotten 
by  posterity,  the  sunken  houses  of  Port  Eoyal  are,  in  calm 
weather,  still  visible  beneath  the  surface  of  the  ocean  ;  while, 
in  striking  contrast,  relieving  the  deep  melancholy  of  the 
scene,  is  a  monument  erected  at  Green  Bay,  on  the  opposite 
side  of  the  harbour,  which  commemorates  the  preservation 
of  Louis  Caldy,  a  native  of  Montpelier,  in  France,  who  left 
his  country  on  account  of  the  Ee vocation  o""  the  Edict  of 
Nantes,  and,  after  having  been  swallowed  up  daring  the 
earthquake,  was,  by  the  great  providence  of  God,  flung  into 
the  sea  by  a  second  shock,  where  he  continued  swimming 
until  rescued  by  a  boat,  and  lived  forty  years  afterwards.'* 

The  tale  of  misery  does  not  end  there.  A  new  Port 
Eoyal  was  being  built  up  by  the  survivors,  when,  in  1693,  a 
hurricane  swept  over  the  town  and  destroyed  a  great  part 
of  the  w^ork ;  and  before  these  fresh  injuries  were  re- 
paired, in  June,  1691,  a  powerful  fleet,  with  fifteen  hundred 
soldiers  on  board,  commanded  by  General  Du  Casse,  the 
governor  of  Hayti,  came  to  spread  further  desolation  over 
the  southern  and  eastern  parts  of  the  island.  They  plun- 
dered and  destroyed  a  vast  number  of  plantations,  and, 
though  ultimately  driven  off  with  a  loss  of  more  than  seven 
hundred  of  their  number,  the  residue  escaped  with  consider- 
able spoil,  and  about  thirteen  hundred  slaves.  There  was 
another  Prencli  invasion  from  Hayti  in  1702,  when  the 
famous  Admiral  Benbow,  though  he  drove  off  the  intruders, 
received  his  death-wound  in  the  encounter ;  and  in  171- 
another  tremendous  hurricane  desolated  the  eastern  side  oi 
the  island. 

*  Montgomery  Martin,  r.  24. 


four 


yet 
■  tho 
)onv, 
L  the 
otten 
calm 
vliilc, 
){  the 
posite 
vation 
10  leit. 
diet  oi 
ag  the 
■\cr  into 

o 

Lmming 
irds.'* 
>w  Port 
1693, a 
sat  part 
ere    rc- 
hunclrecl 
fSse,  the 
on  over 
ey  plan- 
us, ancl. 
,n  seven 
ionsider- 
ere  Nvas 
:hen  the 
Litruders. 

•n  side  oi 


CHAPTER  IV. 

JAMAICA   AND   SLAVERY. 

THE  rRO(iRI«S  OK  JAMAICA — ITS  VAIXK  TO  ENdLAND— SLAVKUY — TlIK 
SLAVi;  INSIKUECTIONS— THE  lUSINCi  OK  1700 — THE  CONniTION  OK  THE 
SLAVES— THE     INSUKKECTiON     OK     1832 — THE   AhOLlTlON"   OK   SLAVEUY    IN 

18134.     [1712-1834.] 

^AMAICA  made  famous  progress  in  spite  of  its 
disasters,  and  was  soon  found  to  be  of  great 
advantage  to  the  mother  country.  '  The  trade 
of  that  island,'  it  was  written  in  172S,  *  employs 
three  hundred  sail  of  ships,  and  about  six  thou- 
sand seamen,  and  tlie  very  duties  on  the  imports  from  thence 
amount  to  near  £100,000  per  annum.  There  are  eight  fine 
harbours  in  it,  besides  many  coves  and  bays,  where  ships 
may  safely  ride.  There  are  also  eighty- four  rivers  v/hich 
discharge  into  the  sea,  and  seven  times  as  many  lesser 
rivers  and  springs  which  run  into  them.  Its  principal 
productions,  besides  sugar,  are  cotton,  ginger,  pimento, 
mahogany-wood,  logwood,  and  indigo.  Very  little  of  tho 
four  last-named  commodities  are  imported  from  the  rest 
of  the  British  plantations,  so  that,  but  for  Jamaica,  wo 
should  be  obliged  to  purchase  them  of  the  French,  Dutcli, 
and  other  nations.  The  cotton  is  necessary  to  work  up  with 
wool  in  many  of  our  manufactures.  The  ginger  is  chiolly 
exported,  though  great  quantities  are  likewise  used  at  home. 
Their  pimento  lessens  the  consumption  of  spices,  which  are 
only  to  be  had  of  the  Dutcli  at  their  own  rates.  Indigo, 
logwood,  and  fustick,  are  used  by  dyers,  and  are  absolutely 
nccessavy  in  many  of  our  manufactures ;  and  before  we  had 

4—2 


)!  ; 


M 


'   V 


ll 


{ 

i<V 

i 

,;i 

1) 

: 

«• 

1 


52 


JAMAICA  AND  SLAVERY. 


those  commodities  of  our  o\vn,  wo  paid  five  times  the  prices 
for  them  that  we  now  do,  and  for  some  of  them  more. 
Before  om'  West  India  plantations  were  settled,  we  paid  the 
Portuguese  from  £4  to  £5  per  cwt.  for  sugar,  now  sold  from 
22s.  to  35s.;  and  above  £5  per  cwt.  for  ginger,  now  com- 
monly sold  at  22s.  6d.  Our  dyers'  wares  were  bought  of  the 
Spaniards,  to  whom  we  paid  for  logwood  from  £100  to  £130 
per  ton,  which  may  now  be  had  at  £9  per  ton,  and  other 
goods  proportionably.  So  that,  by  having  these  plantations, 
we  not  only  save  so  much  as  was  formerly  paid  for  those 
commodities  to  foreigners,  but  we  are  also  able  to  furnish 
other  nations  therewith  ;  and  our  manufacturers,  by  having 
them  at  less  prices  than  formerly,  are  enabled  to  sell  their 
commodities  proportionably  cheaper,  which  is  undoubtedly 
a  great  advantage  to  the  nation.'* 

Though  losing  much  of  its  profit  from  buccaneering 
exploits,  the  island  advanced  steadily  in  wealth  and 
importance  as  an  agricultural  colony  and  a  great  centre  of 
trade  between  Europe  and  the  states  of  North  and  South 
America;  and  there  was  as  steady  a  growth  of  its  population. 
In  1734,  when  it  sent  home  foiOjOOO  worth  of  goods,  and 
received  from  England  £150,000  w^orth,  it  contained  7,644 
whites  and  86,534  blacks.  In  1746,  the  whites  irauibered 
about  10,000  and  the  blacks  112,428.  In  1768  there  were 
17,947  whites,  3,408  free  persons  of  colour,  and  176,914 
slaves.  In  1788  the  Creoles  w^ere  23,000  in  number,  the 
slaves  256,000 ;  and  in  1800  the  island  contained  30,000 
whites,  10,000  coloured  persons,  and  300,000  slaves. 

That  great  increase  of  population  shows  how  rapidly  the 
resources  of  the  colony  were  increased.  But  there  was  a 
dark  as  well  as  a  bright  side  to  the  picture  of  its  growth. 
'  A  faithful  description  of  our  provincial  governors  and  men 
in  powei','  says  the  most  painstaking  local  historian  of 
Jamaica,  *  would  be  little  better  than  a  portrait  of  artifice, 
duplicity,  haughtiness,  violence,  rapine,  avarice,  meanness, 
raDcour,  and  dishonesty  ranged  in  succession,  with  a  very 

•''  Doycr,  '  rolitical  Statu  of  Groat  Britain,'  vol.  xxv. 


mg 

been 

previ 

foui 

(liu'ii 

were 

^vas 

Iiidiai 

slaver 

grcato 

liead ; 

subjec 

to  die 

ouglit 

man,  \ 


'1 


THE  GROWTH  OF  THE  COLONY. 


53 


lly  the 
Iwas  a 
]:owth. 
men 
tan  of 
rtilicc, 
Inness, 
la  very 


small  portion  of  honour,  justice,  and  magnanimity  here  and 
there  intermixed,  to  lessen  the  disgust  which  otherwise  the 
eye  must  feel  in  the  contemplation  of  so  horrid  a  group.'* 
Many  of  those  painful  details  are  of  no  value  to  the  general 
reader,  and  therefore  need  not  here  be  referred  to  ;  but  it  is 
necessary  to  set  forth  some  of  the  most  painful  of  them  in 
illustration  of  the  character,  the  working,  and  the  effects  of 
slavery  in  the  British  West  Indies. 

The  first  Englishmen  in  Jamaica,  finding  it  impossible  to 
bring  back  the  savage  maroons  to  the  bondage  from  which 
they  had  escaped  when  their  Spanish  masters  were  driven 
out,  straightway  began  to  import  new  slaves  from  Africa. 
All  through  the  hundred  and  eighty  years  in  which  slavery 
was  maintained  there  were  about  ten  blacks  to  every  white 
man.  Between  1655  and  1787,  it  is  said  that  there  were 
imported  in  all  676,270  negroes,  and  the  new  arrivals  were 
at  the  same  rate,  about  4,000  a  year,  for  the  ensuing  twenty 
years.  In  1807,  when  the  importation  of  new  slaves  was 
prohibited,  the  blacks  in  the  island  only  numbered  360,000, 
and  after  that,  until  the  emancipation  in  1834,  the  negro 
population  decreased  by  nearly  2,000  a  year,  whereas,  accord- 
ing to  the  ordinary  laws  of  population,  it  ought  to  have 
been  increased  by  nearly  half  as  much,  and,  had  those  laws 
prevailed  all  through  the  time,  it  should  have  been  at  least 
four  times  as  great  as  it  was.  These  statistics  show  that, 
(luring  the  hundred  and  eighty  years,  about  3,000  negroes 
were  each  year  killed  before  their  time  by  hard  usage,  which 
was  often  murder  in  its  cruellest  form.  *  The  early  West 
Indian  planters,'  says  the  historian,  himself  a  champion  of 
slavery,  though  in  more  humane  shape,  '  thought  it  no 
greater  sin  to  kill  a  negro  than  to  knock  a  monkey  on  the 
head ;'  and  he  thus  sums  up  the  law  of  the  island  on  the 
subject :  *  If  a  white  man  murders  a  white  man,  ho  ought 
to  die  for  it ;  but  if  a  white  man  murders  a  black  man,  he 
ought  to  bo  acquitted. 't  If  a  black  man  nmrdercd  a  white 
man,  no  punishment  severe  enough  could  be  inllicted. 


■■'  Long,  'History  of  Jamaica,'  3  vols.,  1711. 


t  Long,  vol.  ii. 


p.  4SS. 


54 


JAMAICA  AND  SLAVERY, 


Those  murders,  however,  were  frequent.  The  presence 
of  the  maroons,  who  often  came  down  from  their  mountain 
fastnesses  to  despoil  the  Enghsh  plantations,  was  a  constant 
incentive  to  the  slaves  to  seek  a  like  lawless  freedom,  and 
they  used  it  in  retaliations  upon  their  former  masters,  con- 
cerning which  the  only  wonder  is  that  they  were  not  more 
vindictive.  *  Many  hundreds  of  them,'  it  was  written  by  a 
traveller  in  1722,  '  have  at  different  times  run  to  the  moun- 
tains, where  they  associate  and  commit  little  robVciriesupon 
the  defenceless  and  nearest  plantations,  and  which  I  imagine 
they  would  not  have  done  but  for  the  cruelty  of  their  usage, 
because  they  subsist  very  hard  and  with  danger,  by  reason 
of  parties  continually  sent  out  by  Government  against  them, 
who  have  £5  a-head  for  every  one  killed,  and  their  ears  are 
a  sufficient  warrant  for  the  next  justice  to  pay  it.  If  the 
negro  be  brought  in  a  prisoner,  he  is  tormented  and  burnt 
alive. '■'^ 

During  more  than  a  century  and  a  half  an  irregular  war- 
fare was  constantly  maintained  between  the  colonists  and 
the  maroons,  recruited  every  year  by  fugitives  from  the 
plantationn  ;  and  few  years  passed  without  some  outburst  of 
insurrection  among  the  slaves,  in  which  they  were  generally 
aided  by  their  kinsmen  of  the  mountains.  Between  1678 
and  1832  twenty-eight  conspiracies  of  special  importance  are 
enumerated. 

The  insurrection  of  1760  will  serve  to  illustrate  their  nature 
and  the  way  in  which  they  were  suppressed.  It  was  begun 
by  about  a  hundred  slaves  newly  imported  from  the  Gold 
Coast,  at  a  plantation  some  twenty  miles  north  of  Kingston. 
*  Having  collected  themselves  in  a  body  about  one  o'clock  in 
the  morning,'  we  are  told,  *  they  proceeded  to  the  fort  at 
Port  Maria,  killed  the  sentinel,  and  provided  themselves 
with  as  great  a  quantity  of  arms  and  ammunition  as  they 
could  conveniently  dispose  of.  Being  by  this  time  joined 
by  a  number  of  their  countrymen  froui  the  neighbouring 
plantations,  they  marched  up  the  high  road  that  led  to  the 

*  Atkins,  '  Voyage  to  the  West  Indies,'  p.  245. 


I 


fi 


ence 
itain 
itant 

and 
con- 
more 

by  a 

loun- 

upon 

agine 

isage, 

eason 

them, 

.rs  are 

If  the 

burnt 

,r  war- 
ts and 
m  the 
urst  of 
iierally 
n  1678 
lice  are 

nature 
begun 

Gold 
Qgston. 
lock  in 
fort  at 
nselves 
as  they 

joined 
bouring 

to  the 


le 


THE  INSURRECTION  OF  1760. 


55 


interior  parts  of  the  country,  carrying  death  and  desolation 
as  they  went.     At  one  estate  they  surrounded  tlie  overseer's 
house,  in  which  eight  or  ten  white  people  were  in  bed,  every 
one  of  whom  they  butchered  in  the  most  savage  manner, 
and  literally  drank  their  blood  mixed  with  rum.     At  other 
estates  they  exhibited  the   same    tragedy,   and  then   set 
fire  to  the  buildings  and  canes.     In  one  morning  they  mur- 
dered between  thirty  and  forty  whites,  not  sparing  even 
infants  at  the  breast.'*     About  sixty  white  men  in  all  were 
slaughtered  by  them  ;  and  the  blood  of  those  sixty  was  paid 
for  by  the  death  of  about  four  hundred,  killed  in  action,  or 
afterwards  executed,  while  six  hundred  more  were  trans- 
ported to  Honduras.  *  The  records  of  crime  and  punishment,' 
says  one  historian,  *  can  hardly  equal  or  excuse  the  horrible 
barbarities  and  exquisite  tortures  which  were  inflicted  by 
and  upon  these  condemned  criminals.      Some  of  them  were 
burned,  some  were  fixed  alive  on  gibbets.     One  of  them  lived 
two  hundred  and  ten  hours,  suspended  under  a  vertical  sun, 
^Yithout  any  sustenance  or  even  a  drop  of  water.     Yet  they 
all  behaved  to  the  last  moment,'  adds  the  writer,  a  clergy- 
man, *  with  a  degree  of  hardened  insolence  and  brutal  in- 
sensibihty,  which  drowned  compassion  and  almost  authorized 
their  doom.'f     The  *  hardened  insolence  and  brutal  insensi- 
bility '  of  one  of  the  sufferers  is  described  by  another  his- 
torian.    *  The  wretch  was  made  to  sit  on  the  ground,  and, 
his  body  being  chained  to  an  iron  stake,  the  fire  was  applied 
to  his  feet.      He  uttered  not  a  groan,  and  saw   his  legs 
reduced  to  ashes  with  the  utmost  firmness  and  composure  ; 
after  which,  one  of  his  arms  by  some  means  getting  loose, 
he  snatched  a  brand  from  the  fire  that  was  consuming  him, 
and  flung  it  in  the  face  of  the  executioner. '| 

It  is  small  extenuation  of  cruelties  like  that  to  say  that 
the  sufferers  had  been  subject  to  yet  greater  cruelties  in  their 

*  Bryan    Edwards,   'History   of    the   British   Colonies    in    the  West 
Indies,'  vol.  ii.,  p.  Gi. 
t  Bridges,  '  History  of  .Jamaica,'  vol.  1.,  p.  99. 
+  Edwards,  vol.  ii.,  p.  65. 


Pi 


I     i: 


(I 


i      a 


.  1 


f-m 


!1 


56 


JAMAICA  AND  THE  COLONIES. 


barbarous  African  homes,  and  that  tlicy  were  schooled  to 
them  by  tlio  lesser  pains  inflicted  on  them  by  their  over- 
seers on  the  plantations.  Some  miti^'ation  of  tlieir  condition 
was  el'fectcd,  under  the  influence  of  En^flish  opinion,  by  the 
Consolidated  Slave  Act  of  1792,  by  which  the  murder  and 
nmtilation  of  negroes  were  made  ofl'ences  in  the  eye  of  the 
law,  and  whicli  regulated  their  foci  and  working  time. 
Before  as  well  as  after  the  passing  of  that  Act,  of  course, 
slaves  who  chanced  to  bo  under  kind  masters  and  overseers 
were  treated  with  some  consideration.  They  were  not 
branded  or  flogged  with  unbearable  severity,  were  allowed 
mail)/  of  the  pleasures  of  domestic  life,  and  were  even  per- 
mittod  on  Sunday  to  cultivate  small  parcels  of  land  for  them- 
selves, and  to  rpply  the  proceeds  in  ministering  to  their 
coarse  tastes.  But  at  best  they  were  slaves,  treated  like 
chattels,  and  cs,3ecially  debarred  from  the  elevating  influences 
of  educatio;\  Secular  teaching  was  not  tolerated,  and  re- 
ligious instruction  was  grudgingly  accorded  to  them. 

Their  state  was  to  some  extent  ameliorated  by  a  law 
passed  in  1807,  which  prohibited  the  further  importation  of 
slaves.  Those  already  in  the  island  thus  became  more 
valuable,  and  common-sense  selfishness  generally  prompted 
the  masters  to  abstain  from  ill-treatment  so  great  as  to  ren- 
der them  useless  servants.  Missionaries  came,  too,  who 
instilled  into  them  new  views  as  to  their  dignity  and  destiny. 
Those  views,  crude  and  violent,  as  was  to  be  expected  from 
the  degraded  condition  of  the  negroes,  wrought  mischief  as 
well  as  benefit.  Many  who  had  before  been  quiet  beasts  of 
labour,  became  idle  and  turbulent  men,  and  a  new  hatred 
sprang  up  between  them  and  their  masters,  by  which  their 
sufferings  w  ere  often  increased,  until  a  terrible  crisis  occurred 
in  the  insurrection  of  1832.  Yet  that  insurrection  helped 
materially  in  bringing  about  their  liberation. 

The  insurrection  began  near  Montego  Bay,  in  the  north- 
west. The  manager  of  an  estate  met  a  black  woman  who 
had  in  her  hand  a  piece  of  sugar-cane,  which  he  supposed  she 
had  stolen.     He  flogged  her  on  the  spot,  and  then  took  her 


1  law 
ion  of 
more 
iipted 
ren- 
wlio 
tiny. 
from 
iii  as 
sts  of 
atrecl 
their 
red 
lelped 


lorth- 
who 
Id  she 
her 


1 

I 


T///:  INSURRECTION  OF  1S32. 


57 


l)ack  to  tlio  estate  to  lo  flogj^cd  again  by  the  head-driver. 
The  driver  chanced  to  bo  her  liusband,  and  he  refused  to  obey 
tlie  manager's  orders.  Aiiotlier  driver  was  called ;  but  ho 
iilso  refused  to  inflict  the  punishment,  and  so  much  sym- 
])atliy  was  shown  by  the  other  slaves  tliat  the  manager  rode 
olf  to  obtain  the  aid  of  the  militia.  Before  he  returned  with 
the  necessary  force  the  chief  offenders  had  escaped.  The 
news  of  this  over-reaching  of  the  authorities  spread  through 
the  afljoining  districts,  and  induced  great  numbers  of  slaves 
to  resolve  that  on  a  given  day  they  would  refuse  to  work  un- 
less free  men's  wages  were  paid  to  them.  Before  the  day 
came,  some  drunken  negroes  set  fire  to  an  estate,  and  that 
act  so  excited  the  others  that  within  a  short  time  the  whole 
district  was  in  flames.  The  flames  lit  up  the  angry  passic  ns 
of  the  multitude.  Desolation  spread  over  all  the  western 
portion  of  the  island,  and  for  a  few  days  the  blacks  gave  vent 
to  their  long  pent-up  fury  without  hindrance.  An  armed 
force  soon  brought  them  under  subjection  again ;  but  the 
planters  were  not  satisfied  by  the  temperate  action  of  the 
military.  After  the  slaves  had  returned  to  their  estates 
under  a  promise  of  pardon,  they  found  that  they  had  oidy 
come  back  to  be  slaughtered.  Martial  law  being  proclaimed, 
thoy  were  shot  and  hung  indiscriminately.  At  Montego 
Inay  negroes  were  often  tried,  sentenced,  and  hung,  all 
within  the  space  of  an  hour  and  a  half,  the  corpses  being 
soon  cat  down  in  order  that  fresh  use  might  be  made  of  the 
gibbets ;  and  in  the  evening  carts  came  round  to  collect  the 
heaps  c  i  dead  bodies  that  they  might  be  thrown  into  a  huge 
pit  dug  for  the  purpose.  In  the  country  districts  no  burial 
at  all  wa'^  given  to  the  victims.  Where  they  were  shot 
down,  there  they  were  left  to  rot  or  become  the  prey  of 
carrion.''^  About  a  do/en  white  men  had  been  murdered. 
Tor  this  more  than  fifteen  hundred  negroes  were  executed, 
and  many  others  died  under  the  lash  of  their  enragC'l 
niasterr^.  The  persecution  lasted  long,  and  fell  especially 
upon  the  slaves  who  had  dared  to  listen  to  the  teaching  of 
*  Pui'liamentary  Papers,  .Jamaica,  1S32. 


m 


:i 


■  p  ;  '  i 


J I 


i  '■' 


c 


58 


JAMAICA  AXD  SLAVERY. 


the  Baptist  missionaries,  although  those  missionaries  appear 
to  have  in  no  way  instigated  the  turmoil. 

The  insurrection  was  quelled;  yet  the  thrill  of  horror 
which  rang  tlirougli  England  quickened  all  men's  ears  to  the 
arguments  tliat  had  long  been  urged  by  Clarkson,  Wilber- 
forco  and  others,  and  in  1834  slavery  was  abolished  through- 
out the  dominions  of  Great  Britain.  But  the  blight  which 
it  had  spread  over  some  of  the  most  fertile  portions  of  the 
earth  could  not  be  removed  by  Act  of  Parliament. 


*u 


pear 

)rror 
3tho 
Ibcr- 
lUgh- 
rhich 
[  the 


^1 


JJTOn:^Jfl:l^JlUl'-^^^ul^IIgBgg^Ima^.^IIa^l^l^:Ba^'ATa^alwr.Ul-'un^^'^^ 


CIIAPTEK  V. 

OUR   WEST   INDIAN    TOSSESSIONS. 

THE  BERMUDAS — THE  BAHAMAS— OTHKR  WEST  INDIAN  ISLANDS — BRITISH 
GUIANA — TKINIDAD— JAMAICA— THE  PRESENT  CONDITION  OK  OUIl  WEST 
INDIAN  COLONIES— THE  CAUSES  OK  THEIU  DETKUIOUATION  AND  THE 
MEANS   OK   THEIR   IMPROVEMENT.      [li'OS-lSSS.] 

LDER  than  any  of  the  West  Indian  Islands  as 
British  possessions  are  the  curious  coral  rocks, 
said  to  be  as  numerous  as  the  days  of  the 
year,  though  only  a  few  of  them  are  large 
enough  for  human  habitation,  which  have 
been  named  the  Bermudas,  after  Juan  Bermudoz,  the 
Spaniard,  who  discovered  tliem  in  1527.  On  one  of  them, 
Tlenry  May,  an  Englishman,  was  wrecked  in  1593,  and 
there  he  and  his  twenty-five  companions  passed  five  months 
while  they  built  a  bark  in  which  to  return  home.  Among 
the  same  group  Sir  George  Somers,  going  out  to  serve  as 
deputy-governor  of  Virginia,  was  also  wrecked  in  1G09.  He 
took  possession  of  them  for  the  Crown  of  England,  and 
having  gone  back  in  1611,  died  in  the  one  known  as  St. 
George's  Isle.  In  the  same  year  a  small  colony  was  founded 
here  by  his  brother' ,  and  since  then  '  the  still-vexed  Ber- 
moothes'  of  Shakespeare,  previously  only  the  terror  of 
voyagers  to  other  parts,  have  been  occupied  by  Englishmen. 
They  afforded  a  welcome  asylum  to  others  besides  the  devout 
Puritan  pilgrim  of  whom  Andrew  Marvell  has  said  that : 

'  Where  the  remote  Bermudas  ride 
In  the  ocean's  bosom  unespied, 
From  a  small  boat  that  rowed  along 
The  listening  winds  received  his  song  : 


! 

$  \ 

;i>  •!   h 

'»    '■  V 

■'•      1  i 

1/)      1', 

ir              1 

n     ,  ! 

L 

Wi 

4 

M 

LLm 

III 

Co 


OUR  II 'KS T  INDL I N  POSSESS/OXS. 


"  What  sliuiild  wi"  do  hut  Hinj,'  His  piiiiso 
Tliiit  It'll  iH  tlir()>i|,'h  tilt;  wiitfry  iiiazr, 
Wlicic  III-  tliti  liii;;o  sta-iiKinstfrs  wracks 
'I  hat  lift  tliu  (Ift^p  upoii  tliiir  hacks, 
I'litoaii  isle  HI)  loni,'  unknown, 
And  yc;t  far  kiiuUr  than  our  own  V 
lie  lauds  us  (111  a  ifrassy  stai^'o, 
Safe  frriiii  the  storms  and  pivlate's  raL,'('. 
Ho  <,'avt'  us  the  eternal  s]irin;^ 
That  hen;  I'liaiiicls  I'Virythiuj^, 
.And  sends  the  fowls  to  us  in  caru 
<  hi  daily  visits  throu^di  the  air. 
He  hanys  in  shades  tho  oranj^'e  hriffht, 
Like  i,'olden  lainiis  in  a  given  ni,i;ht. 
Anil  does  in  the  j)oiiU',L,'i'anates  close 
Jewels  molt!  rich  than  Orniuz  shows. 
Jle  makes  the  hgs  our  mouths  to  meet, 
And  throws  the  melons  at  our  fi'ct. 
With  cedars  chose'U  hy  His  hand 
.l''r(>m  Iicl)anon  Ife  stores  the  land, 
And  makes  the  hollow  seas  that  roar 
I'roclainx  the  amhergris  on  shore."  ' 

Tlicii'  convenient  position  in  tho  Atlantic  Ocean,  lying 
about  six  hundred  miles  to  the  east  of  Virginia,  and  some- 
M'hat  farther  nortli  of  the  West  Indies,  made  the  Bermudas 
a  valuable  halting-place  botli  for  traders  and  for  war-ships 
proceeding  to  tlic  other  colonics,  as  well  as  a  pleasant  home 
for  the  settled  population,  which  during  the  last  century  and 
a  half  has  risen  to  15,000  or  more,  about  half  wliite  and 
half  black.  The  genial  soil  and  climate  especially  favour 
the  production  of  arrowroot,  onions,  and  potatoes ;  but  the 
chief  value  of  the  little  colony  has  been  in  its  military 
advantages.  Formerly  a  dependency  of  Virginia,  its  an- 
nexation to  the  United  States  was  desired  by  Washington, 
who  saw  that  it  could  be  made  *  a  nest  of  hornets  to  annoy 
the  British  trade.'  To  save  it  from  that  use,  it  was  furnished 
v.'ith  almost  impregnable  fortifications  and  a  great  naval 
dockyard. 

South-west  of  the  Bermudas  and  very  near  to  Florida  is 
the  larger  island-group  of  the  Bahamas.  New  Providence, 
one  of  the  number,  was  settled  by  the  English  in  1G29.  Bat 
it  and  the  neighbouring  islands  were  throughout  the  seven- 
teenth century  a  frequent  battle-ground  between  English, 


i 


THE  BERMUDAS  AND  AXTIuUA. 


(>\ 


Spaniards,  and  rrcncli,  and  a  yet  inoro  frequent  field  for 
the  depredations  of  the  buccaneers;  and  not  mucli  peaceable 
use  was  made  of  them  till  after  tlio  American  War  of  Inde- 
pendence, when  they  became  the  undisputed  possession  of 
Tjlroat  ih'itain.  Less  hospitable  than  most  of  the  West 
Indies,  tliey  aro  still  but  thiidy  peopled.  About  45,000 
inliabitants,  three-quarters  black,  are  spread  over  an  area  of 
some  3,500  square  miles. 

The  most  important  of  the  early  acquisitions  of  England 
in   the   West    Indies,   after  Jamaica   and   liarbados,    was 
Antigua.      Sir  Thomas  Warner  colonized  it  in  IG32.     In 
IGGG  it  was  devastated  by  the  French  from  Martinique ;  but 
the  colony  was  re-established  in  the  following  year  by  Loi-d 
Willoughby,  who  sent  thither  some  of  his  liarbadian  subjects, 
and  its  excellent  facilities  for  sugar-cultivation  soon  made  it 
a  favourite  place  of  resort.     The  atrocities  of  slavery  had 
begun  to  bo  mitigated  as  early  as  1723.      '  Several  cruel 
persons,'  it  was  stated  in  the  preamble  of  an  Act  then  passed 
by  the  local  legislature,   '  to  gratify  tlieir  cruel  humours, 
against   the   laws   of   God  and  humanity,   frequently  kill, 
destroy,  or  dismember  their  own  and  other  persons'  slaves, 
and  have  hitherto  gone  unpunished,  because  it  is  incon- 
sistent with  the  constitution  and  government  of  this  island, 
and  would  bo  too  great  a  countenance  and  encouragement 
to  slaves  to  resic-t  white  persons,  to  set  slaves  so  far  upon  an 
equality  with  the  free  inhabitants,  as  to  try  those  that  kill 
them  for  their  lives  ;  nor  is  it  known  or  practised  in  any  of 
the  Caribboe  Islands  that  any  free  person  killing  a  slave  is 
triable  for  his  life.'*     So  great  an  '  inconsistence  with  the 
constitution  of  the  island  '  was  not  now  attempted ;  but  a 
penalty  of  not  less  than  £100  w^as  placed  upon  the  nmrder 
of   a  black,  and  £20    was    charged    for    his    mutilation ; 
and  thereby   more   tenderness    towards   the   negroes   was 
induced.      In   1732    iSIoravian    missionaries    came   to   tho 
island,  and  great  good  resulted  from  their  teaching,  and  still 
more  from  their  actual  example.    In  1831,  when  slavery  was 

*  youthey,  '  llistury  uf  the  Wcrit  Indies,'  vol.  ii.,  p.  t'-jo. 


% 


4 


;  ..,.- 


OUR  WEST  IXDIAN  POSSESSIONS. 


abolished,  Aiiti^'ua,  alonu  of  all  tlio  West  Indian  Islands, 
chose  at  once  to  ^'ivo  full  liberty  to  the  blacks,  instead  of 
passing'  them  throii^'h  the  sta;^'o  of  appronticeship  allowed 
by  law.  '  Here,  as  in  other  islands,'  said  the  governor  of 
Antigua  ill  irtlO,  '  the  material  condition  of  the  emancipated 
race  is  most  satisfactory.  They  are  abundantly  supplied 
with  all  the  necessaries  and  most  of  the  comforts  of  life. 
They  arc  well  fed,  well  housed,  and  well  clothed.  Through 
the  aid  of  friendly  societies,  which  are  in  active  and  benclicial 
operation,  the  poorest  can  command  good  medical  attend- 
ance, and  other  privileges  seldom  enjoyed  by  persons  in  a 
similar  rank  of  life  in  other  countries.  The  number  of 
labourers  withdrawing  from  estates,  and  settling  in  detached 
villages,  continues  to  increase.  There  appear  to  be  seventy 
such  settlements  formed,  containing  about  3,300  houses,  c\nd 
a  population  of  about  9,300.  These  village  communities  are 
not  peculiar  to  Antigua ;  but,  owing  to  the  transition  which 
took  place  here  direct  from  slavery  to  freedom,  without  the 
intervention  of  apprenticeship,  they  have  made  greater 
progress  in  this  island,  and  from  them  may  spring  the  germ 
of  a  middle  class  which  must  exercise  considerable  influence 
over  the  fi^/ure  destinies  of  the  colony.'*  The  number  of 
inhabitants,  black,  white,  and  coloured,  now  in  the  island, 
has  since  been  more  than  trebled. 

Other  islands  of  the  West  Indies  were  annexed  by  Great 
Britain  during  the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth  centuries,  but 
in  none  of  them  was  much  progress  made  until  recent  times. 
During  the  long  and  costly  wars  that  England  carried  on 
with  the  European  nations  and  her  former  colonies  on  the 
continent  of  America,  now  the  United  States,  she  fought 
desperately  for  the  possession  of  those  West  Indian  colonies 
which  had  not  previously  been  greatly  thought  of,  and  of 
others  which  had  not  hitherto  been  hers.  In  1814,  when 
peace  was  restored,  she  found  herself  mistress  of  nearly 
every  important  island,  with  the  exception  of  Cuba,  Ilayti, 
and  Porto  Eico,  from  the  Bahamas  down  to  Trinidad  ;  and 

*  Blue  Book,  1310. 


1 


oiigh 


n 


Great 
s,but 
imes. 
d  on 
the 
ouglit 
lonies 
nd  of 
when 
jarly 
ayti, 
and 


ANTIGUA  AXD  nRlTISII  GUIANA. 


63 


lloii(Uiiab  and  liritish  G  uiana,  ou  tlic  mainland,  also  belonged 
to  her. 

Guiana  had  long  been  coveted  by  adventurous  Enf^lisli- 
mon.     Sir  Walter   Raleif:;h  liad  gone  tliither  in  1505,  be- 
lieving that  thus  lie  could  gain  possession  of  the  imagined 
El  Dorado.     '  He,  like  every  other  J'higlishman,  had  been 
attracted  by  the  fables  of  the  Golden  Gity  of  Manoa  and  the 
Golden  Lake  of  Parina.     Golumbus  had  started  the  fables, 
or  at  any  rate  had  favoured  the  traditions  out  of  wliich  they 
grew.     Vasco  Numcz  do  Balboa  had  fu'st  been  led  by  them 
ill  quest  of  the  glittering  phantom,  and  Pizarro  had,  in  fol- 
lowing it,  won  the  empire  of  Peru.      Two  generations  of 
daring  and  bloodthirsty  adventurers  had  hunted  the  phan- 
tom from  place  to  place,  until  all  tlie  northern  parts  of  South 
America  had  been  brought  under  the  dominion  of  Spain. 
Kaleigh  hoped  that  where  others  had  failed  he  might  suc- 
ceed; and  he  knew  that,  whether  there  was  failure  or  success, 
he  could  offer  no  greater  insult  and  work  no  heavier  injury 
to  Spain  than  by  planting  the  English  standard  in  this  most 
sacred  scene  of  Spanish  bigotry  and  tyranny,  whence  most 
of  the  gold  emj)loyed  by  Philip  the  Second  in  persecuting 
Netherlanders  and  annoying  Englishmen,  and  troubling  the 
whole  of  Christendom,  was  being  extracted  with  the  help  of 
cruelties  that  thrilled  every  honest  looker-on  with  horror. '"^^ 
Ealeigh  failed,  and  suffered  terribly  for  his  project  at  the 
hands  of  James  the  First ;  and,  though  other  Englishmen 
made  small  expeditions  and  even  brief  settlements,  most  of 
Guiana  became  the  property  of  the  Dutch,  and  under  them 
it  was  a  vigorous  colony,  and  a  scene  of  some  of  the  vilest 
atrocities  of  slavery,  during  nearly  two  centuries.     Three  of 
its  provinces — Demerara,   Essequibo,    and    Berbice — were 
seized  by  Britain  in  1796,  and,  though  restored  in  1802, 
were  recaptured  in  1803,  and  confirmed  as  British  posses- 
sions at  the  peace  of  1814.  They  comprise  an  area  of  76,000 
square  miles,  over  the  greater  part  of  which  a  few  Indian 
tribes  roam  undisturbed.     A  population  of  about  250,000, 

*  Fox  Bourne,  •  English  Seamen  under  the  Tudors,'  vol.  ii.,  p.  298. 


64 


OUR  WEST  INDIAN  POSSESSIONS. 


including  Portuguese  as  well  as  English  West  Indians,  and 
inmiigrants  from  India  and  China  as  well  as  negroes, 
cultivates  most  of  the  coast  land,  which  extends  for  some 
200  miles,  and  the  sugar  and  rum  produced  by  it  yield 
a  nourishing  trade  to  George  Tovrii,  the  capital.  The 
vast  resources  of  the  interior,  rich  in  timber,  dyes,  and 
other  natural  productions,  have  only  lately  begun  to  be 
utiHzed. 

Trinidad,  the  n 'Barest  West  Indian  island,  with  an  area  of 
1,754:  square  miles,  was  worthless  Spanish  property  till 
1797,  when  it  was  captured  for  England  by  SirBalph  Aber- 
cromby.  Its  population,  then  17,000,  increased  nearly  ten- 
fold in  the  course  of  the  following  ninety  years,  and  in  sugar, 
rum,  cacao,  arrowroot,  and  other  articles  it  has  a  nourishing 
trade,  although  that  trade  seems  to  be  yet  only  in  its  first 
stage  of  progress.  Its  most  remarkable  feature  is  a  great 
pitch  lake,  to  which  attention  was  first  called  by  the  late 
I'^arl  of  Dundonald,  who  visited  it  as  admiral  of  the  West 
India  Squadron  in  1850.  *  We  arrived  at  La  Brea,'  he 
wrote,  'and  before  daybreak  on  the  following  morning  were 
on  the  road  to  the  lake,  or  rather  stream,  of  bitumen,  now 
indurated,  which  in  former  ages  overflowed  the  lake.  In- 
deed, the  bitumen  beneath  this  road  seems  still  to  be  on  the 
move,  as  is  shown  by  curvilineal  roado  on  its  surface,  like 
waves  receding  from  a  stone  thrown  into  water.  The 
appearance  of  the  lake  is  most  extraordinary.  One  vast 
sheet  of  bitumen  extends  until  lost  amidst  luxuriant  vegeta- 
tion. Its  circumference  is  full  three  miles,  exclusive  of  the 
creeks,  which  double  the  extent.  The  bituminous  surface  is 
of  a  dark  brown,  waxy  consistence,  except  in  one  or  two 
places  where  vlie  fhdd  still  exudes.  Obviously  this  spring 
is  in  full  vigour  beneath,  for  the  whole  surface  of  the  lake 
is  formed  into  protuberances,  like  the  segments  of  a  globe 
pressed  together,  having  hoUcws  filled  with  rain-water, 
which,  except  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  bituminous 
springs,  is  inodorous  and  without  taste — an  extraordinary 
fact,  showing  that  this  bitumen  is  of  a  nature  quite  different 


If  tlio 
CO  is 
two 
ipring 
lake 
[globe 
rater, 
liiious 
lirary 
lei'cut 


TRINIDAD  AND  JAMAICA.  63 

from  that  of  pyrotechnic  mineral  and  vegetable  tar.'^'  The 
bitmnen  obtained  from  this  remarkable  natural  reservoir  has 
come,  since  Lord  Dundonald  called  attention  to  it,  to  be  an 
important  article  of  commerce ;  but  other  sources  of  wealth 
in  Trinidad  are  still  almost  neglected. 

Trinidad  has  fared  better,  however,  than  some  of  our  West 
Indian  possessions.  Those  possessions,  including  British 
Guiana  and  British  Honduras,  comprise,  in  the  aggregate, 
an  area  of  nearly  100,000  square  miles,  being  larger  tliT 
Great  Britain  and  Ireland.  Their  population  hardly  ex- 
ceeds a  million  and  a  half,  and  of  these  more  than  half  are 
Avithin  the  narrow  limits  of  Jamaica  and  Barbados.  Barba- 
dos, indeed,  is  the  dy  one  of  them  which  has  prospered  in 
any  adequate  degree.  To  each  of  its  ICG  square  miles  there 
are  about  1,000  inhabitants,  who  carry  on  a  trade  nearly 
equal  to  that  of  Jamaica,  which  is  twenty  times  as  large 
and  thrice  as  populous. 

Yet,  in  natural  endowments,  Jamaica  is  the  richest  of  the 
whole  West  Indian  group.  Every  stranger  who  has  visited 
it  since  Christopher  Columbus  has  spoken  in  admiration  of 
its  splendid  harbours,  its  beautiful  mountains,  its  luxuriant 
valleys,  and  its  fertilizing  streams.  Ceylon  and  Cuba  alone, 
perhaps,  among  the  islands  of  the  world,  can  rival  it  in 
external  attractions.  '  On  the  northern  side,'  says  one, 
'  the  country  at  a  small  distance  from  the  shore  rises  into 
hills,  which  are  more  remarkable  for  beauty  than  boldness, 
being  all  of  gentle  acclivity,  and  commonly  separated  from 
each  other  by  spacious  vales  and  romantic  inequalities  ;  but 
they  are  seldom  craggy,  nor  is  the  transition  from  the  hills 
to  the  valleys  oftentimes  abrupt.  In  general  the  hand  of 
nature  has  rounded  every  hill  towards  tlie  top  with  singular 
felicity.  The  most  striking  circumstances  attending  those 
beautiful  swells  are  the  happy  disposition  of  the  groves  of 
pimento,  with  which  most  of  them  are  spontaneously 
clothed,  and  the  consummate  verdure  of  the  turf  underneath, 
which  is  discoverable  in  a  thousand  openings,  presenting  a 
*•  '  Life  of  the  Tenth  Alarl  of  Dundonivld,'  vol.  ii.,  p.  ^19. 

5 


I 


i'  . 


:3: 


. 


wm 


.(■ 


66 


OUR   U'KST  fXDIAN  POSSESSIONS. 


cliariiiing  contrast  to  tlio  tlecpor  tints  of  tho  pimento.     As 
tliis  troo,  Nvliich  is  no  less  rcniarkablo  for  fra^'ranco  than  for 
bcanty,  surfers  no  rival  i)lant  to  llourish  witliin  its  sliadc, 
these  ^n'oves  are  not  only  clear  of  untlerwood,  but  even  the 
f^rass  beneath  is  seldom  luxuriant,  the  soil  in  j^'eneral  bein^ 
a  chalky  marl,  which  produces  a  close  and  clean  turf,  as 
smooth  and  even  as  the  finest  Knj^lish  lawn,  and  in  colour 
inlinitely  bri^diter.     Over  this  beautiful  surface  the  pimento 
spreads  itself  in  vai'ious  compartments.     In  one  place  wo 
beheld  extensive  groves,  in  another  a  number  of  beautiful 
groups,   some  of  which  crown   the  hills,  while  others  are 
scattered  down  the  declivities.     To  enliven  the  scene,  and 
add  perfection  to  beauty,  the  bounty  of  nature  has  copiously 
watered  the  whole  district.    No  part  of  the  West  Indies  that 
I  have  seen  abounds  with  so  many  delicious  streams.  Every 
valley  has  its  rivulet,  and  every  hill  its  cascade.     In  one 
point  of  view,  where  the  rocks  overhang  the  ocean,  no  less 
than  eight  transparent  waterfalls  are  beheld  in  the  same 
moment.     As  the  land  rises  towards  the  centre  of  the  island, 
the  eye,  passing  over  the  beauties  that  I  have  recounted,  is 
attracted  by  a  boundless  amphitheatre  of  wood,  "  cedar  and 
branching  palm,"   an   immensity   of   forest,  the  outline  of 
which  melts  in  the  distant  blue  hills,  and  these  again  are 
lost  in  the  clouds.     On  the  southern  side  of  the  island  the 
scenery  is  of  a  different  nature.     In  the  former  landscape 
the  prevailing  characteristics  are  variety  and  beauty  ;  in  that 
which  remains  the  predominant  features  arc  grandeur  and 
sublimity.     When  I  first  approached  this  side  of  the  island 
by  sea,  and  beheld  from  afar  such  of  the  stupendous  and 
soaring  ridges  of  the  blue  mountains  as  the  clouds  here  and 
there  disclosed,  the  imagination,  forming  an  indistinct  but 
awful  idea  of  what  was  concealed  by  what  was  thus  par- 
tially displayed,   was  filled   with  admiration  and  wonder. 
Yet  the  sensatio'n  which  I  felt  was  allied  to  terror  rather 
than  delight.     Thomgli  the  prospect  before  me  was  in  the 
highest  degroe  magniticent,  it  seemed  a  scene  of  magnificent 
cU'iiolatioii.     The  abrupt  precipice  and  inaccessible  cliff  h;ul 


I 


lU'l 

isly 

/cry 
ono 
less 
iamo 
and, 
(1,  is 
■  aiul      I 
le  oi      i 

I  aro      ' 
tho 

cape 

that 
aiii^ 

slam^ 
aiitl 

b  but 
pal'- 
iider. 
athcr 
n  the 
ficcnt 
.T  Uael 


lllE  CHARMS  OF  JAMAICA. 


67 


iiioro  tlio  aspect  of  a  cliaos  tlian  a  creation  ;  or  rather, 
setuiied  to  exhibit  tlio  olTocts  of  some  dreadful  convulsion 
which  liad  hiid  nature  in  ruins.  Appearances,  however, 
improved  as  wo  approached  ;  for,  amidst  tlio  thousand 
bold  features,  too  hard  to  bo  softened  by  culture,  many 
a  spot  was  soon  discovered  where  the  hand  of  industry  had 
awakened  life  and  fertility.  With  these  pleasing'  inter- 
mixtures the  llowin<^  lino  of  the  lower  ran^'c  of  mountains, 
which,  crowned  with  woods  of  majestic  ^M'owtli,  now  be^'an 
♦0  be  visible,  combined  to  soften  and  relieve  the  rude 
olenmity  of  the  loftier  eminences,  till  at  length  the 
savannahs  at  the  bottom  met  tho  sight.  These  aro  vast 
l)hiins,  clothed  cliielly  with  extensive  cane-fields,  displaying 
in  all  tile  pride  of  cultivation  the  verdure  of  spring  blended 
with  the  exuberance  of  autumn  ;  and  bounded  only  by  tho 
ocean,  ^n  whose  bosom  a  new  and  ever-moving  picture 
strikes  tlie  eye  ;  for  innumerable  vessels  are  discovered  in 
various  directions,  some  crowding  into,  and  others  bearing 
away  from,  the  bays  and  harbours  with  which  the  coast  is 
everywhere  indented.' ■'• 

Those  sentences  were  written  in  1793,  when  Jamaica  was 
at  the  lieight  of  its  prosperity  as  a  slave  colony,  and  when 
none  but  the  very  wisest  understood  that  the  grand  and 
beautiful  island  was  being  wasted  by  the  unholy  means  that 
were  beiu  ;  used  for  its  development.  Men  admired  its 
luxuriant  cane-fields,  and  rejoiced  at  tho  wealth  they  yielded, 
not  heeding  that  the  wealth  was  obtained  for  the  profit  of  a 
few  through  the  degradation  of  the  many.  Slavery  being 
the  rule  in  all  the  British  colonies,  Jamaica  progressed  as 
rapidly  as  any  of  the  others.  Since  freedom  has  been  estab- 
lished, its  actual  progress  has  continued,  though,  relatively 
with  other  and  better-governed  dependencies,  that  progress 
is  really  deteriorauon. 

All  tte  institutions  of  the  island  were  offshoots  of  slavery, 
and  plajnned  in  accordance  with  it :  they  have  proved  worse 
than  usdess  under  the  freer  atmosphere  that  now  prevails. 

*  Edwards,  vul.  i.,  pp.  180-183. 

5-2 


.in'  1 


r* 


! 


w 


\  \ 


68 


OUR  WEST  INDIAN  POSSESSIONS. 


Tlio  traveller  entering  the  noblo  harbour  of  Kingston,  which 
was  founded  in  IGO;}  after  the  destruction  of  Port  Royal, 
and  is  now  tho  capital  of  the  island,  expects  to  see  man's 
work  in  some  accordance  with  nature's.     He  finds  a  mean 
and  squalid  haunt  of  poverty  and  vice.     *  The  distant  beauty 
of  tho  varied  buildings  vanishes  before  tho  sight  of  streets 
without  a  plan,  houses  without  the  semblance  of  architecture, 
lanes    and   alleys   without   cleanliness   and  convenience.'* 
'  J)uring  tho  heavy  rains  in  ]\[ay  and  October,  the  water 
finds  its  way  by  broken  and  irregular  channels  into  tho 
gullies  on  tlie  cast  and  west  sides  of  the  town,  but  much  of 
it  pours  down  the  steep  streets,  forcing  along  a  broad  and 
nmddy  stream  a  foot  or  more  in  depth.     As  none  even  of 
the  leading  thoroughfares  are  paved,  nor  provided  with  any 
artificial  channels  for  the  water,  and  the  soil  is  generally 
loose  and  sandy,  their  surface  has  become  ploughed  up  with 
deep  ruts  and  broken  hollows,  while,  from  the  quantity  of 
gravel,  stones,  and  bricks  strewed  about,  they  present  more 
the  appearance  of  river-courses  than  of  streets  in  an  in- 
habited city.     The  cross  streets  are  in  some  respects  still 
worse,  being  often  fianked   by  dilapidated  buildings,  and 
iiitered  over  with  rubbish.     Nor  is  it  only  by  inanimate 
objects   that  the  senses  of  sight  and  smell  are   offended. 
Lean,  mangy  dogs  are  at  all  times  to  be  seen  rolling  about 
in  the  noisome  puddles,  while  others  are  wandering  hero 
and  there,  grubbing  up  the  rubbish  for  food.     Besides  tho 
swme  and  goats  constantly  moving   about,   Kingston   has 
always  been  noted  for  its  number  of  half-starved  dogs.     It 
is  no  unconnnon  thing  to  see  the  carcass  of  one  of  these 
unfortunate  brutes  lying  in  the  middle  of  a  street,  with  a 
troop  of  the  vulture  crows  which  are  ever  wheeling  about 
the  city  tearing  it  to  pieces,  while  the  air  all  around  is 
tainted  with  the  most  baneful  effiuvia.'  I     And  the  diii;  and 
disorder  of  Kingston  too  truly  indicate  the  neglect  and  mis- 
management that  pervade  the  whole  island.     The  same  in- 


to 


*  Madden,  '  Twelve  Months  in  tho  West  Indies,'  vol.  i.,  p.  98. 
f  Martin,  '  West  Iudie.s,'  p.  77. 


I 


and 
mate 
(led. 
jout 
here 
s  the 
has 
It 
these 
ith  a 
ibout 
nd  is 
u  and 
mis- 
Q  iu- 


THE  EFFECTS  OF  SLAVERY. 


69 


dolcncc  and  incompotcnco  that  prevail  in  parochial  matters 
arc  displayed  in  all  the  administration  of  the  colony,  wlietlier 
by  central  authorities  or  by  local  managers. 

The  abolition  of  slavery,  moreover,  has  not  abolished  the 
old  antipathy  between  the  negroes  and  their  former  masters. 
That  antipathy  only  shows  itself  in  new  ways.  The  planters 
expect  that  the  blacks  will  freely  render  as  much  service  as 
was  formerly  forced  from  them  by  terror  of  the  lash.  The 
blacks,  rejoicing  in  their  liberty,  and  willing,  now  that  it  is 
in  their  power,  to  punish  a  race  which  has  treated  tliem  so 
badly,  arc  idle,  or  at  any  rate  prefer  to  toil  on  their  own 
little  farms,  where  all  the  profits  come  to  themselves.  Thus 
a  jealousy  has  arisen,  and  even  been  intensified  during  the 
past  half-century,  which  finds  vent  in  numberless  disputes, 
and  out  of  which  arose  the  so-called  insurrection  of  18G5, 
and  its  vindictive  suppression. 

The  prevalent  absenteeism  increases  this  evil.  The  real 
.  owners  of   West  Indian  estates  seldom  live  on  their  pro- 

perty, which  is  entrusted  to  subordinates  schooled  in  all 
the  vicious  influences  of  slavery,  wlio  make  no  honest  effort 
to  bring  about  a  better  state  of  things  by  educating  the 
negroes,  and  caring  for  them  in  matters  concerning  which 
they  are  too  ignorant  to  care  for  themselves.  All  tlio 
negro's  traditions,  and  most  of  his  present  associations,  in- 
chne  him  to  be  thoughtless,  stubborn,  and  superstitious,  and 
these  characteristics  are  alike  injurious  to  himself  and  his 
employer.  So  long  as  he  can  secure  for  himself  a  home,  in 
which  cleanliness  and  European  comfort  are  not  necessaries, 
enough  cheap  food  to  live  upon,  and  enough  gaudy  clothes 
to  wear,  he  has  no  inducement  to  improve  his  state,  or  to 
consult  the  interests  of  his  masters. 

Perhaps  the  amelioration  of  this  gloomy  condition  of 
affairs  is  not  difficult.  Philanthropy,  though  often  mis- 
guided, has  done  much  to  put  worthier  thoughts  into  the 
negro  mind.  Black  settlements  have  been  formed,  in  which 
gradually  a  higher  self-relinnce  and  a  worthier  spirit  of  inde- 
pendence have  found  expression  in  the  happiness  and  corn- 


s'?, 

■A 


> 


f 

i  ) 


n. 

:»• 

u 


33 


\\ 


70 


OUR  WEST  INDIAN  POSSESSIONS. 


fort  of  the  settlors.  These  must  be  encouraged,  if  only  to 
get  rid  of  the  indolence  and  discontent  of  a  great  part  of  the 
negro  population,  which  help  to  stagnate  the  whole  con- 
dition of  tlie  island.  Nobler  motives,  also,  which  are  only 
the  best  phases  of  self-interest,  must  actuate  the  white 
residents  in  their  relations  with  one  another  and  their  de- 
pendents. A  generous  master  docs  not  often  find  his  trust 
betrayed.  If  he  consults  the  interests  of  those  under  him, 
he  generally  finds  that  his  own  interests  are  not  neglected. 

Moreover,  in  Jamaica,  and  nearly  all  the  West  Indian 
colonics,  there  is  room,  and  even  need,  for  new  settlers. 
Men  and  women  to  whom  the  more  stirring  life  of  most  of 
our  younger  dependencies  is  not  attractive,  who  care  to 
make  their  homes  in  a  temperate  climate  which  renders 
agricultural  life  easy  and  delightful,  if  not  convenient  for 
the  rapid  accumulation  of  wealth,  can  find  it  here. 


t 


M 


CHAPTER   VI. 


NEWFOUNDLAND. 


:1 


Till".  HKOINNINl!  OK  TlIK  NKWKOUNnLAM)  KTSIfKRIKS  — TlIK  GUOWTU  OP 
NKWFOrN'DLANl)  AS  A  COLONY  — ENCiLISlF  NKCI.KCT  OK  IT— TlIK  KISHKHS 
AND  THK  COLONISTS — ITS  TKOl'IiLKS  DUKING  WAR  WITH  FKANCK— ITS 
SUHSEtiUENT  DEVELOl'MENT — SEAL-UUNTINU  ANlJ  COD-KISIIING.  [1  1'J7- 
1888.] 

HE  vast  district  now  known  as  British  North 
America,  to  which  John  Cabot  led  the  way  in 
his  famous  voyage  of  1497,  and  which  then,  so 
far  as  the  bare  discovery  could  make  it,  became 
the  property  of  England,  was  not  at  first  duly 
valued  by  its  claimants.  Cabot's  visit  to  Newfoundland  and 
Labrador  was  followed  by  many  voyages  conducted  by  his 
son  Sebastian  and  other  Englishmen ;  but  their  object  was 
rather  to  find  a  northern  passage  to  India  than  to  make 
good  use  of  the  source  of  wealth  already  reached.  Gradually 
these  districts  came  to  be  frequented  by  fisliing-vessels  in 
search  of  cod,  but  even  in  that  work  foreigners  took  a 
greater  part  than  Englishmen.  The  older  fisliing-trade  with 
Iceland,  carried  on  by  merchants  of  Bristol,  Hull,  and  otlier 
ports,  was  preferred  to  what  was  thought  tlic  more  hazardous 
commerce  with  Newfoundland.  Those  who  courted  danger 
generally  went  elsewhere.  Yet  the  North  American  fisheries 
were  not  altogether  neglected.  In  1544  there  were  many 
English  fishing-ships  in  Newfoundland  waters,  and  '  in  1578 
Anthony  Parkhurst,   an  intelligent  merchant   of    Bristol, 


72 


NE  WFO  UNDLA  ND. 


reported  that  Le  had  been  annually  to  Newfoundland  in  the 
four  years  past,  that  during  that  time  the  English  fishing- 
fleet  had  increased  from  thirty  to  fifty  sail,  and  that,  although 
the  French  sent  about  a  hundred  and  fifty  boats,  the 
Spaniards  about  a  hundred,  and  the  Portuguese  some  fifty, 
the  English,  by  reason  of  the  greater  strength  of  their 
vessels,  were  masters  of  the  trade.'* 

Soon  after  that,  in  1583,  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert  made  the 
attempt,  which  has  been  already  referred  to,  to  turn  New- 
foundlancl  from  a  mere  fishing-station  into  an  organized 
English  colony,  but  it  failed ;  and  failure  also  befell  a 
kindred  effort  of  his  brother.  Sir  John  Gilbert,  more  than 
twenty  years  later.  Other  Englishmen  went  farther  south, 
especially  after  Henry  Hudson  had  gone  to  the  district  of 
New  York ;  and  Newfoundland  continued  to  grow  only  as  an 
irregular  home  of  fishermen  and  their  famihes.  The  share 
taken  by  the  French  in  this  work  is  apparent  by  the  number 
of  foreign  names  yet  existing  in  the  island.  Point  Enrage, 
He  aux  Morts,  Bonne  Bay,  and  Petit  Fort  Harbour,  contrast 
oddly  with  such  blunt  EngHsh  titles  as  Old  Harry,  Piper's 
Hole,  Hell  Hill,  Seldom-come-by,  and  Come-by-Chance. 

Not  much  thought  was  given  to  Newfoundland  by  states- 
men or  rich  adventurers  until  the  Stuart  troubles  made  it 
necessary  for  the  more  violent  members  of  every  party  to  take 
refuge  in  the  New  World.  There,  however,  while  the  Pil- 
grim Fathers  were  establishing  themselves  on  the  main- 
land. Sir  George  Calvert,  afterwards  Lord  Baltimore,  took 
the  lead  of  the  Catholic  emigrants.  In  1623  he  obtained  a 
charter,  assigning  to  him  and  his  heirs  a  large  part  of  the 
island,  and  a  promising  colony  was  founded,  which  fared 
none  the  worse  because  its  leader,  eleven  years  later,  pro- 
cured a  new  grant  and  organized  the  Catholic  settlement  of 
Maryland,  on  the  continent.  Before  long  another  little 
colony,  consisting  of  Irishmen,  was  despatched  by  Lord 
Falkland,  the  Lord-Lieutenant  of  Ireland ;  and  in  1654  Sir 
David  Kirke  conducted  a  second  body  of  Irishmen  to  the 

*  Fox  Bourne,  'English  Seamen  under  the  Tudors,'  vol.  i.,  p.  187. 


I 


OLD  FISHERS  AND  OLD  COLONISTS. 


73 


ites- 
le  it 


Pil- 

lain- 
book 
id  a 
the 
ired 
[pro- 
it  of 
ittle 
jorci 
Sir 
the 


island.  The  winter,  or  resident,  population  of  Newfound- 
land then  numbered  three  hundred  and  fifty  families,  in 
fiffcoon  distinct  settlements.  Besides  this,  there  was  in  the 
summer-time  a  floating  population  of  some  thousands,  con- 
sisting of  the  fishermen  who  came  for  the  cod-season. 

As  these  fishermen  were  of  all  nations,  and  as  they 
thought  it  iheir  interest  to  zealously  oppose  the  permanent 
occupation  of  the  island  by  English  subjects,  great  con- 
fusion necessarily  arose.  For  a  long  time  the  country  was 
hardly  governed  at  all.  The  traders  sought  in  various  law- 
less ways  to  drive  out  the  settlers ;  but  the  settlements 
grew  every  year,  though  also  in  lawless  ways.  '  As  they 
were  made  of  scarcely  any  account  by  the  Government, 
they  grew  up  without  authoritative  regulations,  each  man 
being  a  law  to  himself,  and  doing  what  seemed  good  in  his 
own  eyes.'*  Tn  1667  they  petitioned  King  Charles  the 
Second  for  a  governor  and  proper  legislative  arrangements 
for  their  well-being,  but  no  answer  was  given  to  them.  In 
1674  they  petitioned  again ;  when  they  were  told  by  the 
Lords  of  the  Committee  for  Trade  and  Plantations,  which 
under  the  Stuarts  was  in  the  place  of  a  Colonial  Secretary, 
that  all  plantations  in  Newfoundland  were  objectionable, 
and  that,  if  they  were  not  satisfied  v'ith  their  position,  they 
had  better  come  home.  An  agent,  Sir  John  Berry,  was 
even  sent  out  '  with  orders  for  the  deportation  of  the 
settlers,  the  destruction  of  their  houses,  and  in  fact  the 
entire  uprooting  of  the  thriving  colony  which  had  been 
reared  at  the  heavy  cost  of  the  energies,  treasure,  and  life- 
blood  of  several  of  England's  bravest  sons.'t  Sir  John 
Berry  was  too  humane  to  obey  his  instructions,  but  all  he 
could  do  was  to  leave  the  colonists  as  they  had  been  when 
they  sought  the  protection  of  the  English  Crown.  In  1676 
the  threat  of  extermination  was  withdrawn,  but  strict  in- 
junctions were  issued  by  Charles  the  Second  against  the 
conveyance  of  any  fresh  emigrants  to  Newfoundland. 

*  Pedley,  •  History  of  Xewfoundland.' 

f  Montgomery  Martin,  '  Tlie  British  Colonies,'  vol.  i.,  p.  293. 


\\\ 


'll ' 

mm: 


;l'2 

1:1! 


f?  i 


^  ■ 


74 


KE IVFO  UNDLAND. 


In  that  unpropitious  way  the  colony  grow  into  importance. 
Even  the  wise  statute  of  WiUiani  the  Third's  reign,  piib- 
lislied  at  the  close  of  the  seventeenth  century,  and  regarded 
as  the  charter  of  Newfoundland  liberties,  contained  the  sin- 
gular provision  that  the  master  of  any  fishing-vessel  from 
England,  Wales,  or  Berwick-upon-Tweed,  who,  in  each 
year,  first  entered  any  harbour  or  creek  in  the  island, 
should  during  the  fishing-season  bo  admiral  the  harbour 
or  creek,  and  should  have  full  power  to  decide  all  dilTerences 
between  the  fishermen  and  the  inhabitants.  The  visitors 
were  to  have  their  own  way  in  everything  during  the 
suunner,  and  there  was  to  be  no  magistrate  of  any  sort  in 
the  winter.  '  When  it  is  considered,'  saj's  the  historian, 
*  that,  according  to  the  testimony  of  a  credible  witness,  the 
island  had  become  at  this  time  "  a  sanctuary  and  refuge  for 
them  that  br^  3  in  England,"  it  may  readily  bo  imagined 
that  during  these  wintry,  unoccupied  intervals,  disorder  and 
wrong  must  have  prevailed  to  a  frightful  degree.'* 

At  length  a  better  state  of  things  was  brought  about, 
tliough  only  by  help  of  a  war  which  nearly  deprived  Eng- 
land altogether  of  her  neglected  colony.  The  French  had 
persevered  in  their  North  American  fisheries,  for  which 
their  great  possessions  in  Canada  and  the  adjacent  parts  had 
given  them  special  facilities,  and  the  settlement  of  Placcntia, 
which  they  had  establi--licd  in  Newfoundland,  had,  under 
careful  management,  grown  to  bo  a  source  of  serious  danger 
to  the  English.  William  the  Third,  at  the  outbreak  of  war 
with  France,  made  it  a  special  subject  of  complaint,  *  that 
of  late  the  encroachments  of  the  French  upon  Newfound- 
land and  his  iNIajesty's  subjects'  trade  and  fisheries  there, 
had  been  more  like  the  invasions  of  an  enemy  than  be- 
coming to  friends  wdio  enjoyed  the  advantages  of  that  trade 
only  by  permission.'  Louis  the  Fourteenth  answered  that 
his  right  to  Newfoundland  was  as  good  as  that  of  the  King 
of  England,  and  that  from  Placcntia  he  intended  to  govc 
the   whole   island.     Thereupon  William   resolved   that   ho 

*  I'odley. 


had 


Lnger 
^var 

I  that 

iierc, 
be- 


Liii' 


de 

that 

Kmg 

ivc 

It   he 


IVA/^  IN  fHE  ISLAND. 


75 


should  have  no  share  at  all  in  its  government.  The  resolu- 
tion was  stoutly  contested.  Placcntia  \vas  attacked  in 
1G92,  but  only  slightly  injured,  and  in  IG'JG  the  Trench 
seized  and  desolated  all  the  British  stations  except  those 
in  Conception  Bay.  The  peace  of  Eyswick  in  1G98  merely 
restored  matters  to  their  former  condition,  and  enabled  the 
French  to  increase  their  force  on  the  island  in  anticipation 
of  the  i;reater  struggle  that  began  in  1702. 

Eleven  years  of  varying  fortune  and  constant  trouble 
then  befell  the  Newfoundlanders.  '  On  the  d(  laration  of 
tlie  famous  War  of  the  Succession,*  wo  read,  'Sir  John 
Leake  was  immediately  despatched  by  Queen  Anne  with  a 
small  squadron  to  take  possession  of  the  whole  island, 
which  he  failed  in  ».  .ng,  although  he  succeeded  in  destroy- 
ing several  French  settlements  and  capturing  a  number  of 
vessels,  with  which  he  returned  to  England  at  the  close  of 
the  year.  In  August,  1703,  Admiral  Graydon  was  sent  with 
a  fresh  fleet  off  the  coast  of  Newfoundland,  but,  owing  to  a 
fog  which  continued  with  great  density  for  thirty  days,  his 
ships  were  dispersed,  and  coukl  not  be  brought  together  till 
the  3rd  of  September.  He  then  called  a  council  of  war  as 
to  the  practicability  of  attacking  the  stronghold  of  the 
French  at  Placentia,  and  it  was  decided  that  it  would  not 
be  prudent  to  do  so  with  the  force  at  his  disposal ;  on 
which  he  returned  to  England,  where  his  conduct  was 
severely  censured.  In  1705  the  garrison  ot  Placentia, 
reinforced  by  five  hundred  men  from  Canada,  attacked  the 
British  colonists,  and  attempted  to  become  sole  masters  of 
tlic  island  by  assailing  the  harbour  oi  St.  John's,  where 
tliey  were  repulsed  ;  but  they  succeeded  in  gaining  posses- 
sion of  several  settlements,  destroyed  Fort  Forillon,  and 
spread  their  ravages  as  far  as  Bonavista.  In  170G,  the  British 
again  expeiicd  them  from  tl.eir  recent  conquests,  and 
Capta'n  Underdown,  with  only  toii  ships,  destroyed  several 
of  the  enemy's  craft  in  the  harbours  along  the  coast,  not- 
withstanding that  the  Frenc  h  had  as  many  as  ten  armed 
vessels   on   that   station.     Although   Parliament  earnestly 


l« 


! 


11 

ii 

;• 
A 


'^  F- 


i' '  i 


76 


NEWFOUNDLAND. 


entreated  the  Queen  "  to  use  her  royal  cnrlcavours  to 
recover  and  preserve  the  ancient  possessions,  trade,  and 
fisheries  of  Newfoundland,"  little  attention  was  paid  to 
their  address,  the  whole  disposable  force  being  assigned  to 
the  Duke  of  Marlborough,  at  that  time  in  the  midst  of  his 
victorious  career.  Tiio  Trench,  however,  notwithstanding 
their  repeated  disasters  in  Europe,  still  found  leisure  to 
persevere  in  their  endeavours  for  the  expulsion  of  tho 
English  from  Newfoundland;  and  accordingly  St.  Ovidc, 
the  French  commander  at  Placentia,  having  effected  a  land- 
ing, without  being  discovered,  within  five  leagues  of  St. 
John's,  attacked  and  completely  destroyed  it  on  the  1st  of 
January,  1708.  The  French  then  seized  on  every  English 
station  except  Carbonier,  which  was  bravely  defended  by 
the  lishermcn.  The  news  of  this  misfortune  produced  great 
excitement  in  England,  as  the  possession  of  the  fisheries 
had  ever  been  considered  a  point  of  immense  importance. 
An  expedition  \vas  ordered  to  attempt  to  dispossess  the 
French;  but  little  was  done  beyond  the  destruction  of  a 
few  fishing-stations.  The  British  Government,  being  fully 
occupied  with  the  events  then  occurring  on  the  Continent, 
was  unable  to  take  any  immediate  measures  for  the  recovery 
of  Newfoundland;  but,  at  the  close  of  the  war,  England 
demanded  its  restitution,  which  Louis  the  Fourteenth  was  no 
longer  in  a  condition  to  refuse,  and  by  the  Treaty  of  Utrecht, 
in  1713,  Louis  conceded  the  exclusive  sovereignty  of  New- 
foundland and  the  adjacent  islands  to  Great  Britain.'* 

After  that,  its  possession  by  England  w^as  only  disputed 
on  one  occasion,  during  the  turmoil  in  which  France  lost  all 
her  American  colonies ;  and  better  care  began  to  be  taken 
of  a  colony  whose  value  was  at  last  discovered.  In  1728, 
Captain  Henry  Osborn,  R.N.,  was  sent  out  as  its  first 
governor  and  commander-in-chief,  with  authority  to 
appoint  justices  of  the  peace,  and  to  build  a  court-houso 
and  a  prison.  For  these  there  was  much  need.  There  w\as 
hard  work  to  be  done  in  rooting  up  the  lawless  institutions 

*  Montgumciy  Martin,  vol.  i.,  pp.  294,  295. 


THE  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COLONY, 


77 


all 

ten 
58, 

Irst 
to 

ISC 

ms 


that  had  been  allowed  to  gain  ground  for  generations. 
Mutinies  and  insurrections,  incendiarisms  and  private  feuds, 
had  to  be  overcome  before  there  was  rest  for  cither  governors 
or  governed.  In  the  end  this  was  secured,  and  during  the 
past  century  the  career  of  Newfoundland  has  been  one  of 
almost  steady  progress,  though  the  progress  has  perhaps 
been  less  rapid  than  it  ought  to  have  been.  The  resident 
population,  which  at  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century 
was  only  3,50G,  had  in  17C3  risen  to  13,112,  but  was  in  1785 
only  10,224.  It  was  20,505  in  180G ;  52,157  in  1822; 
«jG,50G  in  1845  ;  122,038  in  1802  ;  and  193,124  in  1884. 
These  numbers  include  the  summer  visitors  to  Labrador, 
which  has  a  fishing-ground  1,000  miles  in  length,  and  is 
subject  to  the  government  of  Newfoundland. 

The  chief  wealth  of  this  colony  has  always  been  in  its 
fish.  '  Other  colonies,'  quaintly  said  the  Abbe  Raynal, 
'  have  yielded  productions  only  by  receiving  an  equal  value 
in  exchange.  Newfoundland  alone  hath  drawn  from  the 
depths  of  the  waters  riches  formed  wholly  by  nature,  and 
which  furnish  subsistence  to  several  countries  of  both 
hemispheres.  How  much  time  hath  elapsed  before  this 
comparison  hath  been  made  !  Of  what  importance  did  fish 
appear  when  compared  with  the  gold  which  men  went  in 
search  of  in  the  New  World  ?  It  was  long  before  it  was 
understood  that  the  representation  of  a  thing  is  not  greater 
than  the  thing  itself,  and  that  a  ship  filled  with  cod,  and  a 
galleon,  are  vessels  equally  laden  with  gold.  There  is  even 
this  remarkable  difference,  tnat  mines  can  be  exhausted,  but 
never  fisheries.  Gold  is  not  reproductive ;  the  fish  are  so 
incessantly.' 

The  value  of  the  fisheries  was  thoroughly  appreciated  in 
early  times,  and  especially  during  the  first  half  of  the 
seventeenth  century.  It  was  this,  indeed,  that,  under  a 
mistaken  view,  led  statesmen  and  merchants  at  homo  to  use 
all  the  means  in  their  power  to  discourage  permanent  settle- 
ment in  the  island.  They  desired  that  all  the  waters  round 
about  should  be  used  only  for  fishing,  and  that  the  whole 


ilf: 
■:|  1 


!"■ 


\.rX[    i 


78 


NEIVFO  UNDLA  XD. 


coast  should  be  nothing  but  a  curing-grountl.  In  IGIO,  five 
thousand  seamen,  in  15,000  tons  of  shipping,  collected 
15,000  tons  of  fish.  In  1614,  the  trade  employed  twice  as 
many  men,  and  was  twice  as  profitable.  In  1G77  it  was 
less  than  it  had  been  in  1615,  and  in  1681  it  had  sunk  very 
much  low^er.  The  decline  was  attributed  to  the  evil 
influences  of  steady  colonization.  It  was  really  due  to  the 
greater  care  of  the  trade  taken  by  the  French  Government, 
and  the  facilities  provided  by  it  for  the  disposal  of  the  pro- 
duce. Tliis  continued,  and  further  hindrani3e  to  the  exclusive 
use  of  the  fisheries  by  England  came  through  the  later  com- 
petition of  the  United  States.  Fishers  from  England  and 
the  inhabitants  of  New^foundland  carried  on  the  trade  with 
advantage  ;  but  their  French  and  American  rivals  pursued  it 
with  yet  greater  zest  under  the  encouragement  of  bounties, 
which  its  free  trade  policy  prevented  the  English  Govern- 
ment from  giving. 

The  same  causes  hindered  the  development  of  the  other 
resources  of  Newfoundland.  Until  near  the  beginning  of 
the  present  century,  the  internal  wealth  of  the  island  was 
almost  entirely  neglected,  and  its  agricultural  and  manufac- 
turing pursuits  are  capable  of  very  much  further  extension, 
in  spite  of  all  that  has  hitherto  been  done.  Its  abundant 
stores  of  copper  were  hardly  made  use  of  before  1863,  and 
the  lead  and  silver  mines,  in  which  also  it  is  rich,  only  began 
to  be  worked  at  more  recent  dates.  Although  Newfound- 
land has  an  area  of  40,200  square  miles,  ;ts  coast-line  is  the 
chief  part  that  has  as  yet  been  found  profitable. 

That  coast-line,  indented  by  numberless  bays,  harbours, 
coves,  and  creeks,  has  not  much  beauty  to  recommend  it, 
and  St.  John's,  on  a  south-eastern  peninsula,  is  the  only 
important  town  to  be  seen  along  the  whole  of  its  rugged 
course.  The  other  towns  are  little  more  than  haunts  for  tlie 
collection,  preparation,  and  reshipment  of  the  cod,  seal, 
and  herring  that  furnish  a  livelihood  to  most  of  the  inhabi- 
tants. Cod,  and  its  oil,  form  more  than  half  their  exports; 
and  most  of  the  other  half  consists  of  seal-oil  and  seal-skins. 


fegan 


burs, 
it, 
|only 
^getl 
the 
seal, 
labi- 
)rts ; 


SEAL-HUNTING. 


Seal-himti 


ill  tlu 


L'doii? 


)f  tb 


most  liazar( 
people,  though  it  has  been  made  easier  by  the  substitution 
of  steamships  for  the  small  sailing  vessels  formerly  engaged 
in  it.     *  The  vessels,'  it  was  said  in  an  account  of  the  busi- 
ness as  it  was  conducted  in  1848,  '  are  from  GO  to  150  tons, 
with  crews  of  from  sixteen  to  thirty  men  each,  provided 
with  firearms  to  kill  the  seal,  and  poles  to  defend  the  vessels 
from  the  pressure  of  the  ice.     \\\  the  beginning  of  INIarch 
tlie  crews  of  the  vessels  collect  on  the  ice  with  hatchets  and 
saws,  and  cut  two  lines  in  the  frozen  surface,  wide  enough 
apart   to    allow    their  schooners  to  pass.     After  the  thick 
Hakes  have  been  sawn  or  cut  through,   they  have   to  be 
pushed  beneath  the  firm  ice  with  long  poles.     The  vessels 
then  get  out  to  sea,  if  possible,  through  the  openings,  and 
work  their  perilous  way  to  windward  of  the  vast  fields  of 
ice,  until  they  arrive  at  one  covered  with  the  animals  of 
which  they  are  in  quest,  and  which  is  termed  a  seal-meadow. 
Tiie  seals  are  attacked  by  the  fishers,  or,  more  properly  speak- 
ing, hunters,  with  firearms,  or  generally  with  short,  heavy 
batons,  a  blow  of  which  on  the  nose  is  instantly  fatal.    The 
hooded  seals  somethnes  draw  their  hoods,  which  are  shot- 
proof,  over  tbeir  heads.     The  large  ones  frequently  turn  on 
the  men,  especially  when  they  have  young  ones  beside  them, 
and  the  piteous  cries  and  moans  of  the  latter  are  truly  dis- 
tressing to  those  v.'ho  are  not  accustomed  to  the  immense 
slaughter  which  is  attended  with  so  great  a  profit.     Tlie 
skins,  with  the  fat  surrounding  the  bodies,  are  stripped  off 
together,  and  the  carcasses  left  on  the  ice.     The  pelts  or 
scalps  are  carried  to  the  vessels,  whose  situation,  during  a 
tempest,  is  attended  witli  fearful  danger.     Many  have  been 
known  to  be  crushed  to  pieces  by  the  ice  closing  on  them. 
Storms  during  the  dark  night,  among  vast  icebergs,  can  only 
be  imagined  by  a  person  wlo  lias  been  on  a  lee  shore  in  a 
gale  of  wind  ;  but  the  hard)  seal-hunters  seem  to  court  such 
hazardous  adventures.'*     By  the  employment  of  large  and 
swift  steamships,  Lho  risks  of  goal-hunting  arc  lessened,  but 
*  iSlniitifntiii  ry  ^riutiri,  vol.  i.,  \^.  V)-\. 


! 


!  t 

^  1 


^^'^^-'-'^^ 


8o 


NE  ]  VFO  UNDLA  ND. 


the  new  arrangement  yields  less  profit  than  tlic  old  to  any 
but  the  capitalists  who  own  the  vessels ;  and  even  in  their 
case  the  profits  are  very  variable,  being  dependent  on  the 
uncertain  movements  of  wind  and  ice.  In  1811  as  many  as 
685,000  seals  were  caught  by  the  old  sailing  vessels ;  the 
totals  were  only  150,000  in  1882,  and  about  400,000  in  1883. 
Less  treacherous  is  the  calling  of  the  cod-fisher.  This  is 
of  two  sorts.  The  deep-sea  fishery  is  conducted  chiefiy  by 
vessels  from  Europe  which  come  for  the  season.  The  shore- 
lishery  is  in  the  hands  of  the  resident  population,  and  is 
pursued  with  but  little  change  in  method,  though  with  vary- 
ing results,  from  year  to  year.  '  An  immense  number  of 
boats  of  different  descriptions  are  engaged  in  the  shore- 
lishery  ;  punts,  skiffs,  jacks,  or  jackasses,  western  boats  and 
shallops,  employing  from  one  to  seven  men  each,  according 
to  their  size  and  the  distance  they  may  have  to  sail  before 
they  reach  their  respective  fishing-grounds.  The  punts  txA 
snuxU  boats  are  generally  manned  by  two  persons,  and  em- 
ployed in  fishing  within  a  very  short  distance  of  the  harbours 
or  circles  to  which  Oiey  belong.  The  skiffs,  carrying  three 
or  four  hands,  procu'I  to  more  distant  stations,  sometimes 
twenty  or  thirty  miles.  The  western  boats  are  larger  than 
skiffs,  and  usually  fish  off  the  entrance  of  St.  Mary's  Bay. 
The  shallops  are  still  larger  craft.  The  punts  and  skiffs, 
constituting  what  is  termed  a  "  mosquito  fleet,"  start  at  the 
darliest  dawn  of  day,  and  proceed  to  the  fishing-grounds, 
where  the  cod  are  expected  in  great  abundance,  for  at  cer- 
tain seasons  they  congregate  and  swim  in  shoals.  These 
boats  generally  land  their  cargoes  at  the  "  stage"  at  least 
once  a  day.  The  western  boats  and  shallops  split  and  salt 
their  fish  aboard,  and  return  to  their  respective  harbours 
when  they  have  expended  all  their  salt  or  loaded  their  craft. 
The  "  stage  "  is  erected  on  posts,  and  juts  out  into  the  sea 
far  enough  to  allow  the  boats  to  come  to  its  extremity,  for 
the  ready  discharge  of  their  cargoes.  On  the  same  platform 
is  the  salt-house,  which  is  provided  with  one  or  more  tables, 
around  which  are  placed  wooden  seats  ,  nd  leathern  aprons 


ids, 

ler- 

leso 

tast 

salt 

kirs 

laft. 

Isea 


)rm 
lies, 


COD-FISIJIXG. 


Si 


for  the  ciit-throats,  licadcrs,  and  spHttcrs.  Tlic  fish  having 
been  thrown  from  the  boats,  a  man  is  generally  employed  to 
pitch  them  -with  a  pike  from  the  stage  on  to  the  table  before 
the  cut-throat,  who  rips  open  the  bowels,  and,  having  also 
nearly  severed  the  head  from  the  body,  passes  it  along  the 
table  to  his  right-hand  neighbour,  the  header,  whose  busi- 
ness is  to  pull  off  the  head  and  tear  out  the  entrails.  From 
them  he  selects  the  liver,  and  in  some  instances  the 
sound.  The  head  and  entrails  being  precipitated  through  a 
trunk  into  a  flat-bottomed  boat  placed  under  the  stage,  and 
taken  to  the  shore  for  manure,  the  liver  is  thrown  into  a 
cask  exposed  to  the  sun,  where  it  distils  itself  into  oil,  and 
the  remaining  blubber  is  boiled  to  procure  an  oil  of  inferior 
quality.  After  having  undergone  tlr'g  operation,  the  cod  is 
next  passed  across  the  table  to  tho  splitter,  who,  in  the 
twinkling  of  an  eye,  cuts  out  ihe  backbone  as  low  as  the 
navel,  l^'or  the  next  process  the  cod  are  carried  in  hand- 
barrows  to  the  Salter,  by  whom  they  arc  spread  in  layers 
upon  tlie  top  of  each  other,  with  a  proper  quantity  of  salt 
between  each  layer.  In  this  state  the  lish  continue  for  a 
few  days,  when  they  are  again  taken  in  barrow^s  to  a  square 
wooden  trough,  full  of  holes,  which  is  suspended  from  the 
stage  head  in  the  sea.  The  washer  stands  up  to  his  k:.ees 
in  this  trough,  and  rubs  the  salt  and  slime  off  the  cod  with  a 
soft  mop.  It  is  then  taken  to  a  convenient  spot  and  piled 
up  to  drain.  On  the  following  day  or  two  it  is  removed  to 
the  fish-flakes,  and  there  spread  in  the  sun  to  dry,  being 
piled  up  in  small  faggots  at  night.  When  sufficiently  dried, 
the  cod  arc  stored  up  in  warehouses,  ready  for  exportation.'* 

Herring-fishing,  generally  carried  on  as  an  adjunct  to  tho 
cod-fishery,  and  by  the  same  men,  has  lately  become  an  im- 
portant branch  of  trade  in  Newfoundland,  where  also  un- 
limited supplies  of  salmon  and  lobsters  are  availal;lc  .aid  are 
being  taken  advantage  of. 

Sci)arated  by  the  Gulf  of  St.  Lawrence  from  the  North 
American  mainland,  and  more  isolated  tlian  there  was  need 

*  Montgomery  Martin,  vol.  i.,  pp.  3ol,  -jo.'j. 

G 


W- 


f'i'i 


.'I 

■A 


i 


82 


NE  WFO  UNDLA  ND. 


for  from  the  larger  British  colonies  there,  Newfouncllancl 
has  not  avoided  participation  in  the  hindrances  to  the  general 
progress  wliicli  were  due  to  race-jealousies  and  other  causes  ; 
but  at  the  same  time  it  lias  suffered  from  the  pardonable 
pride  of  the  colonists  in  maintaining  the  integrity  of  their 
venerable  island  government,  while  its  neighbours  have  seen 
the  wisdom  of  federating  as  parts  of  the  Canadian  Dominion. 
Until  the  spring  of  1888  all  efforts  of  the  more  far-seeing  of 
the  Newfoundlanders  to  effect  a  union  were  overruled. 
Then,  however,  negotiations  were  opened  for  securing  the 
long-desired  change  ;  and  much  benefit  may  be  expected  to 
ensue  from  the  adoption  of  the  policy  thus  tardily  approved. 
As  a  province  of  the  Dominion,  Newfoundland  should  have 
far  more  prosperity  than  could  be  hoped  for  so  long  as  it 
remained  a  detached  and  not  too  well-managed  little  colony. 


fJ" 


,  1 
! 


II 


i      I 


CHAPTER  YII. 

FKKNCII    NOKTH    AMKllICA. 

TlIK  KKKNCIl  iN  NOUTII  AMKlilCA  — TIIK  COLONY  Ol'  NKW  lliANCK— SA.Ml  Kf, 
C'llAMI'I.AlN-  -TIIIC  T'UOCUFSS  Ol'  TIIK  COI.ONV-  WAKS  NVITIl  TIIK  INOIANS 
AN'I)  THK  KNCI.ISII — TIIK  CONTKSTS  JiKTWKKN'  TIIK  KN(iJ.I«H  AM)  KKKNTU 
COLONlhTS — TUK  K.\(iI,I.SH  CONQUESTS  OV  NOVA  HCUTIA,  C'AI'K  15UKT0N, 
AND   CANADA.      [1  r)2  1 -1  700.] 

N  1524  Giovanni  Vcrazzano,  a  llorentinc  in  the 
service  of  I'rancc,  ^vent  on  a  voyage  in  search 
of  the  north-west  passage  to  Cathay.  Know- 
ing, what  Cabot  had  to  lind  out  for  himself, 
that  America  stood  in  the  way,  Verazzano  sailed 
across  the  Atlantic  to  the  west  of  Carolina,  intending  thence 
to  follow  the  northward  course  of  the  shore.  This  he  did, 
making  curious  acquaintance  with  the  natives  whom  ho 
passed,  until  he  reached  the  island  now  known  as  Nova 
Scotia.  There,  rightly  judging  that  he  had  already  made 
discoveries  of  suflicient  importance,  he  abandoned  his  first 
intention,  and,  passing  the  southern  side  of  Newfoundland, 
he  returned  to  France.  His  proposal  that  all  this  great 
territory  should  at  once  be  appropriated  by  King  Francis  the 
First  was  not  adopted  ;  but  ten  years  afterwards,  in  1534, 
Francis  sent  out  another  exploring  expedition  under  Jacques 
Cartier.  Cartier  first  visited  Newfoundland,  and  nearly  cir- 
cumnavigated it ;  and  then  passed  through  the  Culf  of  St. 
Lawrence  into  Chaleur  Jiay,  so  named  by  him  because  of 
the  summer  heat  which  lie  found  there.     On  its  sliore  he 

G— li 


It: 


n 

:i3 


8; 


FRENCH  NORTn    1MERICA. 


erected  *  a  fair  liiffh  cross,'  from  which  was  suspended  a 
shield  marked  with  a  ileur-de-hs,  and  the  words  '  Vive  lo 
Eoi  de  la  Trance,'  in  token  that  the  country  was  henceforth 
the  property  of  his  master.  Going  home  in  the  autumn,  ho 
returned  next  year  to  prosecute  his  discoveries.  He  entered 
the  St.  Lawrence  Eiver,  and,  passing  the  site  of  Quebec, 
proceeded  to  a  hill  from  which  he  had  so  fair  a  prospect  of 
the  surrounding  country  that  he  called  it  Mont  Koyal,  now 
Montreal.  Hearing  the  natives  talk  of  their  '  Canada,'  or 
huts,  he  supposed  that  to  be  the  name  of  the  country.  On 
his  return  to  France  he  urged  its  immediate  colonization. 
To  that,  however,  Francis  the  First  did  not  assent,  and 
after  two  feeble  efforts  made  in  1540  and  lo42  by  a  French 
nobleman,  the  Sicur  de  Hoberval,  Canada  was  undisturbed 
by  Europeans  for  more  than  fifty  years. 

But  it  was  not  forgotten.  In  1598  Henry  the  Fourth 
sent  a  party  of  convicts,  under  the  Marquis  de  la  Eoclie,  to 
explore  and  colonize  New  France,  as  Canada  was  then  styled. 
Tliey  seem  not  to  have  gone  so  far,  but,  halting  at  Sable 
Island,  near  Nova  Scotia,  to  have  there  lived  miserably, 
until  five  years  afterwards,  when,  in  pity  for  their  state,  the 
survivors,  twelve  in  number,  were  allowed  to  go  back  to 
France.  Before  that,  in  1600,  King  Henry  had  granted  a 
patent  for  the  more  orderly  colonization  of  the  North 
American  continent,  and  in  1(303  an  expedition  was  sent  out 
under  the  guidance  of  the  famous  Samuel  Champlain.  That 
expedition  was  planned  only  for  exploring  the  country. 
Champlain  proceeded  to  the  St.  Lawrence  Kiver,  and  after 
tracking  its  course  as  far  as  Montreal,  whither  Cartier  had 
gone  long  before,  he  returned  to  France  in  the  same  year 
with  a  report  of  his  observations.  In  1601  he  went  out 
again  with  a  small  colonizing  party,  of  which  the  Sieur  de 
Monts  was  appointed  governor  ;  *  all  New  France,'  says  the 
chronicler,  '  being  contained  in  two  ships.' 

They  proceeded,  net  to  the  mouth  of  the  St.  La\\Tence, 
but  to  the  islands  and  mainland  a  little  south  of  it,  and  there 
they    wandered    about    for   Komc    time,    exploring    all    tliu 


i.i 


i.* 


THE  BEGINNINGS  OE  NEW  ERANCE. 


85 


country,  and  making  a  place  which  they  called  Port  Royal, 
now  Annapolis,  in  Nova  Scotia,  the  centre  of  their  investiga- 
tions. A  simple  little  colony  grew  np  under  the  wise 
management  of  Champlain,  who,  while  De  Monts  was  in 
France,  arranging  for  extension  of  the  colony,  was  its  chief 
director.  The  task  of  providing  food  for  the  company  was 
each  day  assigned  in  turn  to  one  of  the  number.  '  We  had 
ordinarily,'  they  said,  *  as  good  cheer  as  we  could  have  at 
La  Rue  aux  Ours  of  Paris,  and  at  far  less  charges,  for  there 
was  none  but  two  days  before  his  time  came  was  careful  to 
go  a-hunting  and  fishing,  and  brought  some  dainty  tiling 
besides  that  which  was  our  ordinary  allowance.  When 
March  came,  the  best  disposed  among  us  did  strive  who 
should  best  till  the  ground,  and  make  gardens  to  sow  in 
them.  It  was  a  marvellous  pleasure  to  see  them  daily  grow 
up,  and  yet  greater  contentment  to  use  thereof  so  abundantly 
as  we  did.'"''' 

After  four  years  thus  spent  in  exploration  and  delibera- 
tion, the  site  of  Quebec — the  Indian  name  of  a  strait— was 
fixed  upon  as  the  chief  station.  Champlain  went  home  for 
two  more  sliip-laads  of  people  and  stores,  and  returned,  as 
lieutenant-governor  of  the  colony,  in  July,  1008.  His  first 
care  was  to  divide  the  land,  to  see  that  it  was  suitably 
cleared  and  built  upon,  and  to  make  sure  of  provisions  for 
the  winter  ;  his  second,  to  be  friends  with  the  neighbouring 
Indians.  This  policy  led  him  to  assist  the  Algonquiiis  in 
war  with  the  Iroquois,  when  he  won  a  battle  with  a  single 
gun-shot.  The  shot  killed  two  chiefs  and  wounded  another; 
whereupon,  terrified  by  the  new  sight  and  sound,  and  by  the 
instant  falling  of  the  leaders,  the  enemy  fled.  Slowly  and 
steadily  the  colony  advanced  under  the  wise  oversight  of 
Ciiamplain.  Missionaries  and  more  settlers  came.  Some 
of  the  idle  colonists  showed  an  inclination  to  mutiny,  and 
made  violent  efforts  to  bring  Champlain  into  disgrace  witli 
tlie  Prench  king.  Tliough  these  were  unsuccessful,  they  led 
to   embarrassment   by  causing   the   appearance  of   a  rival 

''■  Churchill,  *  Collection  of  Voyages,' 


1 


'A 

.* 

J)   . 
W  \ 


Baa 


86 


FRENCH  NORTH  AMERICA. 


party  of  settlers.  But  Champlain  quickly  overcamo  all 
dilCiculties.  He  succeeded  in  amalgamating  the  two  parties. 
He  sent  back  to  Franco  those  men  who  refused  to  work. 
He  formed  alliances  with  the  friendly  native  tribes.  Hostile 
tribes  lie  checked  by  his  firm  dealing,  at  the  cost  of  very 
little  blood.  On  one  occasion  he  was  offered,  by  way  of 
hostage,  three  young  girls  to  bring  up  as  he  chose.  He 
accepted  the  gift,  and  they  became  almost  the  first  Indian 
converts  to  Christianity.  One  of  them  soon  died  ;  but  the 
other  two  he  carefully  educated,  and  learned  to  love  as 
daughters. 

In  that  prudent  way  tne  colony  of  New  Fraiicfe,  or  Acatlie, 
the  first  European  settlement  in  the  northern  parts  of  the 
American  continent,  was  begun.  But  troubles  soon  arose 
to  hinder  its  progress,  although  by  them  fresh  attention  was 
attracted  to  the  work,  and  thus  it  was  ultimately  )|('lpn<]  on. 

Many  of  the  first  colonists  were  Huguenots,  \\\  iG27  ^ho 
whole  management  was  intrusted  to  a  new  and  CatliolJo 
association,  styled  the  Company  of  Ope  Hundred  Partners, 
which,  under  the  direction  of  Cardinal  liichelieu,  IjouIs  t|>e 
Thirteenth's  great  minister,  made  its  fhst  grmit  object  tho 
conversion  of  the  North  American  Indians  to  Christianity  ; 
its  second,  the  extension  of  comu\ovoo,  atiil  ospecially  of  tlio 
fur  trade.  Jesuits  were  sent  out  as  spiritual  guides  of  the 
enterprise,  and  'Protestants  and  other  huretics  and  Jews' 
were  rigidly  excluded, 

Champlain  had  only  commenced  to  reorganize  his  colony 
in  accordance  with  these  arrangements  when  a  much  greater 
embarrassment  arose.  The  proceedliigM  of  l-lin  Fj'ench  in 
North  America  were  jealously  legajded  by  the  BngUHJi,  vvlio, 
though  they  had  hitherto  been  content  with  proBpcilling  tjio 
Newfoundland  fisheries,  regarded  LliM  wlinlo  region  as  i\\b\\ 


t: 


own  by  right  of  John  Cabot's  discovyr.Vi  (ft  10 1  I  llin 
governor  of  Virginia  sent  a  force  to  Nova  F^cotla.  and  there 
captured  and  destroyed  the  little  settlement  at  Pol't  lluytll, 
which  Champlain  had  first  establibhed.  As  nothing  morn 
was  done  at  tlii-^  time,  ar/1  as  the  French  colonists  were 


Tj 


Lei' 
I  in 

I", 
no 

■ir 

Ik- 

L 

11! 


SAMUEL  CIIAMPLALVS  COLOXY 


S7 


then  prospering  in  their  new  homo  at  Quebec,  they  were 
not  mucli  disturbed  by  that  action.  But  in  1G21,  Sir 
William  Alexander  obtained  from  James  the  Tirst  a  grant 
of  the  whole  peninsula  in  which  Port  lloyal  had  been  con- 
structed, ami  whicli,  as  it  was  to  bo  colonized  by  Scotchmen, 
was  now  for  the  first  time  styled  Nova  Scotia,  and,  to  aid 
his  project,  a  distinct  body  of  gentry,  the  baronets  of  Nova 
Scotia,  was  organized  in  l()2o  by  Charles  the  First,  each 
baronet  receiving  10,000  acres  of  land,  and  being  bound  to 
send  out  six  men  to  the  colon;, .  Alexander  at  first  con- 
tented himself  with  driving  out  all  tlie  French  still  resident 
in  the  peninsula  ;  but  in  1028  he  sent  David  Kirke,  a  French 
Protestant  refugee  of  Scottish  origin,  to  invade  (Quebec. 
Kii'ke  entered  the  St.  Lawrence  with  a  small  fleet,  and 
summoned  Champlain  to  surrender.  Champlain  replied 
tJiat  '  ho  was  sure  Kirke  would  respect  him  much  more  for 
defending  himself,  than  for  abandoning  his  charge  without 
first  making  trial  of  the  English  guns  and  batteries,'  and 
tjiat  be  would  wait  his  attack.  But  the  failure  of  supplies, 
both  in  food  and  powder,  reduced  the  garrison  of  Quebec  to 
such  extremities,  that,  when  Kirke  retui-ned  in  the  following 
year,  Champlain  was  forced  to  abandon  the  settlemont 
without  a  struggle.  He  returned  to  France,  and  during 
throo  years  Quebec  was  in  the  hands  of  the  I'higlish. 

\\\  l088,  however,  by  the  treaty  of  St.  Germains,  between 
Charles  the  First  and  Louis  the  Thirteenth,  Quebec  and  all 
the  disputed  territory,  extending  from  Cape  Breton  into  the 
unknown  west,  was  ceded  to  France,  and  Champlain  went 
back  to  the  settlement  for  which  he  had  done  so  much. 
lie  died  in  lO.'irj,  having  fairly  earned  the  title,  given  him 
liy  comrades  and  successors,  of  Father  of  the  Colony. 
Acadie,  or  iTew  France,  as  the  whole  territory  was  again 
called,  then  revived,  although  destined  to  be  the  scene  of 
frequent  strife  between  the  rival  nations  of  France  and 
Fnglanil  for  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  more. 

Troubles  also  came  from  the  Indians,  whose  riglits  wore 
liy  liu  aiuauH  bO  woll  rospected  as  they  had  been  by  Cham- 


P 


I 

J,: 


It 

■13 


''\\ 


88 


FRENCH  NORTH  AMERICA, 


plain,  though  oven  he  had  at  last  found  it  impossiblo  to 
abstain  from  mixing  in  their  quarrels,  and  so,  while  re- 
ceiving the  friendsliipof  some,  meeting  witli  vinclicLlve  oppo- 
sition from  others.  The  fur  h'ado,  from  which  the  rrench 
settlers  derived  most  of  their  profit,  brought  them  into 
intimate  relations  with  the  natives,  and,  besides  the  legiti- 
mate baiter,  they  soon  acquired  the  habit  of  exacting  from 
those  tribes  whom  they  protected,  as  well  as  from  those  they 
conquered,  a  heavy  tribute  in  skins.  Thus  they  made  for 
tl)cmselves  sullen  friends  and  cpcn  enemies,  ready  to  use 
the  endless  opportunities  that  occurred  for  revenging  upon 
individuals  the  injuries  that  they  received  from  the  whole 
community. 

Gradually  encroaching  upon  the  native  territories,  and,  in 
spite  of  tbe  frequent  loss  of  life  and  property  which  they 
incurred  at  the  hands  of  the  Indians,  growing  steadily  in 
numbers  and  influence,  the  French  sought  to  extend  their 
dominion  in  a  southerly  as  well  as  in  a  westerly  direction. 
\Vith  the  English  settlements  on  the  coast  they  dared  not 
interfere ;  but  from  IMontreal,  which  was  founded  as  a 
European  town  in  1641,  as  well  as  from  Quebec  and  the 
intervening  forts,  they  made  numerous  raids  towards  the 
south  in  the  ir.terior,  aiming  to  carry  the  limits  of  New 
France  down  to  the  ]\Iississippi.  There  they  over  and  over 
again  came  into  collision  with  the  English,  who,  also  seek- 
ing to  obtain  f ars  from  the  natives,  went  westward  too,  and 
considered  that  the  St.  Lawrence  and  the  great  lakes  con- 
nected with  it  formed  the  narrowest  boundary  proper  to 
New  England.  Thus  the  barrier-line  became  an  endless 
subject  of  dispute  and  a  cause  of  colonial  warfare,  to  which  the 
peace  existing  between  the  two  nations  in  Europe  yielded 
no  restraint. 

A  curious  instance  of  the  aggressive  spirit  encouraged 
among  the  French  colonists  by  Louis  the  Fourteenth  and 
his  bold  ministers,  liichelieu  and  Colbert,  is  in  the  charter 
granted  in  1GG2  to  a  new  West  India  Company,  as  it  was 
styled,  which  was  to  try  and  win  possession  of  all  the  best 


W 


WAR  117771  THE  ENGLISH. 


89 


. 


eel 

id 

IS 


parts  of  both  North  and  feoutli  America,  as  well  as  the 
neij,'hijounng  islands,  from  thu  Amazon  up  to  Hudson's  liay, 
and,  in  fact,  of  every  region  and  country,  '  so  far  as  the  said 
company  may  be  able  to  penetrate,  wliL'ther  the  countries 
may  now  appertain  to  France,  as  being  or  having  been 
occupied  by  Frenchmen,  or  in  so  far  s  the  said  cc^mpany 
shall  establish  itself  by  exterminating  or  coii(]uering  tiio 
natives  or  colonists  of  such  i^uropean  nations  as  are  not  our 
allies.' 

The  French  West  India  Company  did  not  long  exercise 
authority  over  the  colonists  of  Canada  ;  but  the  colonists 
readily  adopted  the  policy  of  'exterminating  or  conquering* 
oil  which  it  was  founded.     In   1G78,  one  named  La  Ballo 
organized   a    scheme    for    penetrating    south.      After   two 
years   of    preparation,  ho   proceeded   westward    as    far  as 
the  ^Mississippi,  and  then  gradually  passed  down  its  course 
till  he  reached  its  mouth,  in  the  liay  of  Mexico.     Of  the 
adjoining  country  he  took  possession  in  the  name  of  his 
sovereign,  in  whoso  honour  he  called  it  Louisiana.     He  also 
set  up  a  fort  in  Florida.     Soon  after  that  his  men  mutinied, 
and  put  him  to  death  ;  but  others  carried  or   his  ambitious 
project.     AUiances  were  formed  with  the  Illinois  and  other 
Indian  tribes  near  the  Mississippi,  and  a  fierce  war  was 
waged  between  these  allies  and  the  Iroquois  and  other  tribes, 
whom  the  English  colonists  on  the  coast  befriended.     With 
the  Illinois  on  their  side,  the  French  found  they  had  raised 
up  an  opposition  too  formidable  to  be  properly  withstood  ; 
and  when,  in  1G89,  the  Illinois  made  peace  with  the  Iroquois, 
and  all  the  Indians  became  partisans  of  the  English  interest, 
they  were  in  innuinent  danger  of  themselves  falling  victims 
to  the  '  extermination  and  conquest '  which  they  designed  for 
others.  In  desperation,  Frontignac,  then  governor  of  Quebec, 
planned  an  expedition  for  the  capture  of  New  York  and  the 
neighbouring  settlements  of   the  English.      As  a  counter- 
move  the  people  of  New  York  and  New  England  sent  an 
army,  under  General  W'nthrop,  for  the  conquest  of  Nova 
Scotia.     Both  expeditions  failed,  but  others  were  entered 


i: 


J^.W^. 


v<;^  -^  „o. 


IMAGE  EVALUATION 
TEST  TARGET  (MT-3) 


// 


^ 


4 


r-cj 


1.0 


I.I 


1.25 


ISilM    |2.S 

■  50     ■^"       ■■■ 

1^  1^    |2.2 

11 


1.4 


I!:  Ufi 


^ 


>  -> 


'/ 


S 


Photographic 

Sciences 

Corporation 


33  WEST  MAIN  STREET 

WEBSTER,  N.Y.  USC3 

(716)  873-4503 


#(\ 


tv 


<^ 


cS"^ 


'"■""^■B 


90 


FREXCII  XORTH  AMERICA. 


upon,  until,  both  French  and  EngHsh  being  wearied  out  by 
their  previous  strife,  there  was  for  a  time  a  cessation  of 
hostilities. 

The  grcatci-  strength  of  the  English  in  America,  however, 
keeping  pace  with  tlio  successes  of  the  mother  country  in 
Europe,  caused  a  serious  crippling  of  the  projects  of  their 
colonial  enemies.  By  the  Treaty  of  Utrecht,  in  1713,  besides 
the  abandonment  of  the  French  claims  to  Newfoundland, 
which  has  been  referred  to,  Nova  Scotia,  or  Acadie,  was 
given  up  to  the  English,  and  all  schemes  for  the  extension 
of  French  sovereignty  along  the  Mississippi  were  declared 
to  bo  unlawful.  New  France  was  thus  restricted  to  the 
regions  then  and  still  known  as  Canada.  The  restriction 
was  not  permanent,  and  the  lack  of  any  clear  definition  of 
the  boundaries  left  room  for  future  quarrel ;  but  for  a  time 
there  was  peace. 

New  France  had  suffered  greatly  from  the  ambition  of  its 
colonists  and  their  governors.  During  tlie  time  of  peace  it 
made  rapid  progress.  *  In  1720,'  we  are  told,  '  Quebec  had 
a  population  of  about  7,000,  and  TJontreal  of  3,000.  Nine- 
teen vessels  cleared  from  Quebec,  laden  with  peltries,  lumber, 
tar,  tobacco,  flour,  and  pork,  and  four  men-of-war  were  built 
in  the  colony.  Part  of  the  upper  and  lower  towns  of  Quebec 
had  been  built,  but  the  adjacent  shores  and  islands  were 
still  covered  with  forests.  The  society  generally  was  de- 
scribed as  gay  and  sociable,  consisting  chiefly  of  military 
men  and  the  lower  order  of  noblesse,  all  poor  and  likely  to 
continue  so,  being  much  better  adaptetl  for  practising  the 
most  agreeable  ways  of  spending  money  than  the  more 
laborious  methods  of  making  it.  They  saw  their  English 
neighbours  steadily  employed  in  accumulating  wealth,  but 
consoled  themselves  with  the  reflection  that  they  did  not 
know  how  to  enjoy  it.  Their  favourite  employment  was  the 
fur  trade,  the  only  one  indeed  at  all  adapted  to  their  excitable 
natures  and  desultory  habits  ;  but  the  little  fortunes  they 
occasionally  made  thereby  were  compared  by  the  traveller 
who  visited  them  to  the  hillocks  of  sand  in  the  deserts  of 


I 


'i 


)f 


CANADA  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.      91 

Africa,  which  rise  and  disappear  ahnost  at  the  same  moment. 
Below  Quebec  the  banks  of  the  St.  Lawrence  were  laid  out 
in  tolerably  cultivated  seigniories.  Trois  Rivieres  then  con- 
tained only  SOO  inhabitants.  The  city  of  Mor.treal  was 
rapidly  extending,  and  was  in  a  great  degree  protected  from 
the  incursions  of  hostile  Indians  by  villages  inhabited  by 
friendly  tribes.  Above  Montreal  there  were  only  detached 
stations  for  defence  and  barter  with  the  natives.  Fort 
Cataraqui,  or  Frontenac,  on  Lake  Ontario,  appears  to  have 
stood  in  the  midst  of  an  uncultivated  country,  without  any 
settlements  in  its  vicinity.  At  Niagara  a  cottage  was  digni- 
fied with  the  name  of  a  fort,  and  guarded  by  a  few  French 
oflicers  and  soldiers.'* 

That  moderate  prosperity,  and  all  the  care  taken  by  the 
colonists  for  their  solid  advancement  in  ways  of  agriculture 
and  commerce,  wore  chiefly  due  to  the  wise  govermnent  of 
the  Marquis  do  Vaudreuil,  v,'ho  died  in  1725,  after  ruling  in 
Canada  for  twenty-two  yeai's.  His  successor,  the  Marquis 
do  Beauharnais,  was  of  more  ambitious  temperament,  and 
under  him  new  quarrels  with  the  English  were  provoked. 
Tliey  were  of  no  great  importance,  however,  until  they  were 
aggravated  by  the  outbreak  of  fresh  war  between  England 
and  France  in  ITli.  In  1745  Cape  Breton,  a  valuable  island 
which  had  remained  in  the  hands  of  the  French  after  the 
surrender  of  the  neighbouring  mainland  of  Nova  Scotia,  was 
taken  by  a  naval  force  from  Britain,  aided  by  New  England 
troops ;  and  in  171G  and  1717  the  French  sought  to  recover 
both  it  and  Nova  Scotia.  By  the  treaty  of  Aix-la-Chapelle, 
in  1718,  Cape  Breton  was  restored,  and  Nova  Scotia  was  left 
in  English  hands ;  but  the  spirit  of  opposition  thus  renewed 
between  the  rivalcolonists  could  not  be  wholly  stayed  by  Euro- 
pean treaties.  The  old  antagonism  as  to  the  possession  of  the 
basin  of  the  Mississippi  and  the  adjoining  districts  again 
became  formidable.  It  was  augmented  by  a  new  governor 
of  Canada,  the  ]Marquis  du  Quesne,  who  arrived  in  1752 ; 
and  the  violence  of  his  successor,  the  Marquis  de  Vaudreuil, 
*  MontcfoiiKTv  Martin,  vnl.  i.,  p.  10. 


ffi 


tti! 


?^H 


U  t 


;,;=;y 


92  FRENCH  NORTH  AMERfCA. 

sent  out  in  1705,  led  to  the  final  overthrow  of  his  govern- 
ment and  of  the  authority  of  France  in  North  America. 

The  Pennsylvanians  had  carried  on  such  a  lively  trade  in 
furs  witli  tlie  Iroquois  who  resided  between  Lakes  Michigan 
and  Erie,  that  the  importance  of  the  trade  led  to  the  planning 
of  the  separate  settlement  of  Ohio.  That  movement  pro- 
voked the  jealousy  of  the  Canadians,  who  asserted  their 
right  to  the  territory,  and  proceeded  to  maintain  their  title 
by  force  of  arms.  Thus  strife  began  again.  Du  Quesne  built 
a  fort,  which  bore  his  own  name  ;  and  the  English  erected 
a  Fort  Necessity,  very  near  to  it,  which  George  Washington, 
then  learning  his  work  as  a  soldier  and  a  patt'iot,  was  sent 
to  defend.  This  he  did  until,  in  an  attack  on  Fort  du  Quesne, 
he  was  unsuccessful,  and  then  he  had  to  capitulate. 

Good  came  out  of  this  disaster,  as  it  helpc  1  to  arouse 
English  interest  in  the  dispute.  A  strong  force  v/as  organizied 
and  sent  out  in  January,  1755,  under  General  Braddock, 
who,  detaching  a  part  of  his  army  for  work  in  other  quarters, 
led  the  rest  into  Ohio,  with  V/ashington  as  his  second  in 
command.  There  Braddock  was  mortally  wounded  and  his 
army  defeated.  Other  defeats  followed.  The  English  sol- 
diers, ill  adapted  for  the  new  ways  of  fighting  in  which  they 
had  to  engage,  and  often  at  variance  with  the  colonial 
militias,  proved  at  first  unable  to  cope  with  the  Canadians, 
who  had  been  reinforced  by  a  large  body  of  troops  from 
France.  Not  till  1758,  when  Pitt  had  sent  out  another 
strong  force  for  the  assistance  of  the  colonists,  were  they 
able  to  withstand  the  encroachments  of  the  enemy.  Then, 
however,  the  tide  turned.  Sir  Ealpli  Abercromby,  as  com- 
mander-in-chief, found  himself  at  the  head  of  an  army  of 
50,000  men,  and  able  to  make  three  separate  and  formidable 
attacks  upon  the  French  in  Canada  and  in  the  outlying  dis- 
tricts which  they  had  begun  to  regard  as  their  own.  The 
first  party,  under  General  Amherst,  with  James  Wolfe  as  his 
chief  assistant,  was  sent  to  capture  Cape  Breton,  and  this 
was  soon  done  through  the  skill  and  boldness  of  Wolfe. 
The  second,  led  by  Abercromby  himself  against  the  enemy's 


a 


31' 


le 


ITS  COXQUEST  BY  ENGLAND. 


93 


forts  in  the  basin  of  the  Mississippi,  was  less  successful,  but 
it  served  to  hinder  the  French  from  making  any  fresli 
encroachments  in  that  direction.  The  third,  in  which 
Washington  was  employed,  with  General  Forbes  for  chief, 
was  directed  against  Fort  du  Quesne,  which  was  easily  cap- 
tured, and  the  whole  Ohio  district  was  restored  to  the 
English. 

In  these  ways  the  summer  of  1758  was  well  employed. 
In  1759  yet  bolder  work  was  done.  Three  separate  armies 
were  again  organized,  and  each  achieved  the  task  assigned 
to  it.  By  one  the  Mississippi  region  was  secured.  By 
another  Fort  Niagara  was  captured,  and  the  French  were 
thus  driven  north  of  the  St.  Lawrence.  But  the  exploits  of 
the  third  army  were  more  memorable. 

It  was  commanded  by  General  Wolfe,  who,  though  then 
only  thirty-three  years  old,  had  been  intrusted  with  the 
most  difficult  work  of  all.  He  was  to  make  himself  master 
of  Quebec,  and  thus  expel  the  French  from  their  central 
stronghold.  '  Before  the  city,  more  strongly  fortified  by 
nature  than  by  art,  could  be  attacked,'  St»,ys  his  biographer, 
'  a  vast  theatre,  exceeding  thirty  miles  in  extent,  and  em- 
bracing both  sides  of  a  prodigious  river,  had  to  be  occupied 
by  an  army  numbering  not  quite  7,000  men.  Within  view 
of  a  much  superior  force,  in  a  hostile  country,  and  sur- 
rounded by  prowling  savages,  it  was  necessary  that  distinct 
operations  should  be  carried  on  by  several  detachments  ; 
but  distant  though  these  detachments  were,  Wolfe,  by  his 
constant  presence  as  well  as  by  his  master-mind,  so  directed 
them  that  they  acted  with  all  the  unity  of  a  single  battalion. 
Between  the  invaders  and  the  only  weak  side  of  the  city 
lay  a  defensive  army,  surrounded  by  impregnable  entrench- 
ments, and  commanded  by  a  cautious  and  hitherto  suc- 
cessful general ;  but  Wol'e,  by  his  unwearied  vigilance  and 
his  untiring  perseverance,  at  length  beguiled  his  unwilling 
adversary  to  meet  him  in  the  open  field.'*  '  In  this  contest, 
with  so  many  difficulties,  one  may  say  with  nature  itself,' 

*  Wright,  'Life  of  Majoi-licmtal  James  Wolfe' 


•:X 


ill 


I  -.( 


<\ 


j': 


t 


i<i 


■A  \ 


i 


94 


FRENCH  NORTH  AMERICA. 


said  Burke,  '  the  genius  of  the  commander  showed  itself 
superior  to  everything ;  all  the  dispositions  were  so  many 
masterpieces  in  the  art  of  war.* 

Wolfe,  with  whom  acted  a  ileet  of  twenty  sail  of  tlie  line, 
landed  on  the  Isle  of  Orleans,  overlooking  Quebec,  at  the 
ond  of  June,  1759.  The  French  army  of  about  13,000  men, 
commanded  by  the  Marquis  de  Montcalm,  was  quartered 
partly  in  the  lower  town,  on  the  bank  of  the  river,  partly 
in  the  upper  town,  built  on  a  hill  to  the  westward,  partly 
on  the  fortified  heights  stretching  eastward  as  far  as  the 
Falls  of  Montmorency.  Wolfe  occupied  Point  Levi,  on  the 
south  side  of  the  St.  Lawrence,  exactly  opposite  Quebec, 
with  a  portion  of  his  army,  which  he  instructed  to  bombard 
the  town.  This  was  unsuccessful,  and  he  himself  failed  in 
an  attempt  to  seize  the  entrenchments  at  Montmorency, 
when  182  of  his  men  were  killed,  and  650  wounded.  Fur- 
ther action  was  delayed  by  a  fever  which  threatened  to 
remove  him  before  his  work  was  done,  and  he  had,  in  July, 
to  transport  most  of  his  troops  to  Point  Levi,  leaving  only 
a  garrison  on  the  Isle  of  Orleans.  He  was  still  weak,  and 
no  immediate  movement  w^as  expected  by  the  enemy,  when, 
shortly  after  midnight  of  the  12th  of  September,  he  stealthily 
embarked  his  army  in  flat-bottomed  boats  and  followed  the 
tide  as  far  as  a  convenient  landing-place  on  the  northern 
shore,  now  known  as  Wolfe's  Cove.  Thence  he  marched 
along  a  rocky  path,  and  by  daybreak  was  on  the  Plains  of 
Abraham,  above  Quebec,  and  in  the  rear  of  the  army  of 
De  Montcalm.  The  French  general,  as  Wolfe  had  antici- 
pated, thought  that  only  a  part  of  the  English  army  had 
thus  approached,  and  went  recklessly  to  punish  the  im- 
pudent intruders.  At  ten  o'clock  the  armies  met,  Wolfe's 
being  carefully  and  compactly  arranged  for  the  battle,  De 
Montcalm's  in  some  confusion  and  widely  spread  out.  No 
English  shot  was  fired  till  the  nearest  French  were  within 
forty  yards  of  their  assailants.  Then  volley  succeeded  volley, 
while  Wolfe  himself  headed  a  bayonet  charge.  Twice  he 
was  wounded  without  abandoning  his  place  as  leader  of  the 


THE  END  OF  NEIV  FRANCE. 


xl 


95 


attack.  A  third  and  mortal  wound  made  it  impossible  for 
him  to  hold  up  any  longer.  '  Support  me,'  he  wliispered  to 
one  near  him,  '  let  not  my  brave  soldiers  see  me  drop.  The 
day  is  ours  :  keep  it !'  He  was  taken  to  the  rear,  and  a 
surgeon  was  called.  'It  is  needless,*  he  said;  'it's  all 
over  with  me.'  They  thought  it  was  even  then  all  over 
with  him,  when  some  soldiers  were  heard  shouting,  '  They 
run !  they  run  !'  Wolfe  started  up,  and  asked  in  a  leaden 
whisper,  '  Who  runs  ?'  '  The  enemy,  sir,'  was  the  answer; 
'  they  give  way  everyv.'here.'  '  God  be  praised  !'  he  ex- 
claimed. '  One  of  you  run  to  Colonel  Barton,  and  tell  him 
to  march  with  all  speed  down  to  Charles  River,  and  cut  off 
the  retreat  of  the  fugitives.     I  die  in  peace.' 

The  exploit  by  which  he  died  won  Canada  for  Great 
Britain.  Quebec  speedily  capitulated.  In  the  following 
spring  its  English  garrison  was  feebly  besieged  by  the 
enemy ;  but  an  English  fleet  drove  them  off,  and  taking 
refuge  in  Montreal,  they  were  there  surrounded  on  the  8th 
of  September,  1760,  by  all  the  three  branches  of  the  British 
army.  On  the  same  day  they  tendered  their  submission, 
and  before  night-time  the  whole  of  New  France  was  formally 
surrendered  to  England.  That  surrender  was  confirmed  by 
the  treaty  of  peace  signed  in  Paris  in  1763,  in  accordance 
with  which  France  not  only  '  ceded  and  guaranteed  to  his 
Britannic  Majesty,  in  full  right,  Canada,  with  all  its  de- 
pendencies,' but  also  gave  up  its  West  Indian  colonies  of 
Guadeloupe,  Dominica,  Martinique,  St.  Vincent,  Grenada, 
and  Tobago,  and  its  East  Indian  possessions.  Thus  Eng- 
land was  provided  with  the  nucleus  of  another  great  nest  of 
American  colonies  twenty  years  before  it  finally  lost  the 
earhcr  settlements  out  of  which  grew  the  United  States. 


i,! 


:M:  \     I 


li! 


r? 


fl 


.»> 


II 


it 


hi 


o 

in 


le 
le 


CHAPTEB  VIII. 

NOVA   SCOTIA   AND   NEW   liltUXSWlCK. 

THR  FRKNCH  SKTTrKRS  IN  NOVA  srOTTA  — THFIU  HANtSHMKNT  IN  irTi'i — 
PHOfiHKSH  oy  NOVA  SCOTIA,  CAI'K  lUlKTON,  AM)  NKW  nUlNHWICK  INDKU 
THK    KNCJMSH — A    KIUK   IN    NKW    IJIILNSWICK — I'UINl'K    EDWAUli's     ISLAND. 

11713-lSG]  J 

OVA  SCOTIA,  or  Acadie,  as  we  have  seen, 
having  hcen  colonized  by  the  French  in  1G04, 
was  in  1G14  conquered  by  tlie  EngHsh,  and  in 
1G21  assigned  by  James  the  First  to  Sir  William 
Alexander  and  his  baronets  of  Nova  Scotia.  In 
1G67  it  was  given  back  to  France,  and  in  1713  it  was  again 
and  finally  transferred  to  Great  Britain,  although,  during 
nearly  half  a  century  more,  there  were  frequent  quarrels 
about  it  between  the  two  nations. 

By  General  Nicholson,  the  first  British  governor,  the 
French  residents,  then  numbering  nearly  10,000,  were 
allowed  to  remain  in  peaceable  occupation  of  their  homes 
and  property,  and  this  notwithstanding  the  refusal  of  most 
of  them  to  give  up  their  allegiance  to  the  Crown  of  France. 
Forty  years  afterwards  they  had  increased  to  about  17,000 
or  18,000,  the  British  settlers  being  only  some  5,000.  The 
presence  of  so  great  a  majority  of  aliens,  in  close  sympathy 
with  the  Canadians,  who  were  then  attempting  to  regain  the 
colony,  was  a  not  unreasonable  cause  of  alarm  to  the  subjects 
of  George  the  Third  ;  and  as,  in  1755,  they  erected  forts, 
and  in  various  ways  sought  to  viid  their  countrymen  in  a 


n 


,  i 


ff^^^WB 


I 


THE  FRENCH  L\  NOVA  SCOTIA. 


97 


1 


project  for  reconquering'  the  province,  they  were  in  that  year 
forcibly  removed  by  the  J'hij^'hsh  authorities,  and  distriiiuted 
over  the  colonies  of  New  J^n^dand,  New  York,  and  Viri^inia. 
Only  after  tlio  transfer  of  all  the  Trench  North  American 
territories  to  Great  J hitain  in  17(10  were  theso  unfortunato 
people  permitted  to  return  to  their  homes,  and  then  solely 
on  condition  of  their  avowing  themselves  British  subjects. 
About  a  i;ixth  of  tlie  munber  availed  themselves  of  the  per- 
mission. Their  sufferings,  for  which,  it  must  be  admitted, 
they  or  their  leaders  were  alone  responsible,  have  been 
told  in  Longfellow's  pathetic  poem  of  '  Evangeline,'  which, 
if  it  uses  pardonable  license  in  concealing  the  offences  of 
many  of  tho  French  settlers,  in  no  way  exaggerates  the 
virtues  of  somo  and  tho  troubles  of  all.  Picturesque,  and 
doubtless  true,  is  its  portrayal  of  tho  homely  life  of  tho 
more  quiet  among  them  : 

'  In  tlie  Aciuliiin  land,  on  the  sliorcjs  of  the  P>ivs!n  of  Mina?', 
Distant,  Htrludrd,  still,  tin-  littlu  villii;;e  of  ( Jnind-rn'! 
Lay  in  the  fruitful  valley.     Vast  meadinvs  stiL'tclicd  to  tho  eastward. 
Giving  the  vdlaj^e  its  name,  and  jjasture  to  Hocks  without  nunilier. 
Dikes,  that  the  liands  of  the  fanners  had  raised  with  labour  incessant, 
Shut  out  the  turhident  tides  ;  but  at  stated  seascjns  the  llood),'atts 
()|»ened,  and  welcomed  the  sea  to  wander  at  will  o'er  the  nit.adows. 
West  and  south  there  were  fields  of  flax,  and  orchards  and  cornfields, 
Spreading  afar  and  unfenced  o'er  the  j-lain  ;  and  away  to  the  northvviird 
IJloniidon  rose,  and  the  forests  ohl,  and  aloft  on  the  mountains 
Sea-fogH  pitched  their  tents,  and  mists  from  the  mighty  Atlantic 
Looked  on  the  happy  valley,  but  ne'er  from  their  station  descended. 
There,  in  the  midst  of  its  farms,  reposed  the  Acadian  village. 
Strongly  built  were  the  houses,  with  frames  of  oak  and  client  luit, 
Such  as  the  peasants  of  Normandy  built  in  the  reign  of  the  Hem  its. 
Thatched  were  the  roofs  with  dormer  windows  ;  and  gables  projecting 
Over  the  basement  behiW  protected  and  shaded  the  doorway. 
Ihere,  in  the  tranquil  evenings  of  summer,  when  briyhtly  the  sunset 
Lighted  the  village  street,  and  gilded  the  vanes  on  the  chimneys. 
Matrons  and  maidens  sat  in  snow-white  cap?  and  in  kirtles. 
Scarlet  and  blue  and  green,  with  distaffs  spir.ning  the  golden 
Flax  for  the  gossiping  looms,  whose  noisy  shuttles  within  doors 
Mingled  their  sound  with  the  whirr  of  the  wheels,  and  the  songs  of  the 

maidens. 
Solemnly  down  the  street  came  the  parish  priest  ;  and  the  children 
Paused  in  their  play  to  kiss  the  hand  he  extended  t(j  bless  them. 
Reverend  walked  lie  among  them  ;  and  up  rose  matrons  and  maidens, 
Hailing  his  slow  approach  with  words  of  affectionate  welcome. 
Then  came  the  labourers  home  from  the  fields,  and  serenely  the  sun  sank 

rr 
i 


;Ui! 


irr 


n    ' 


98  A'Ol'A  SCO 77 A  AXP  XKIV  lilWXSlVICK'. 

Ditwii  tu  Ills  rot,  iind  twilight  pn.vaili  tl.     Amni  fnun  tho  lulfry 
Softly  tlu;  Aii'Ji/iiH  Miiiinifd,  an  I  ovt.T  tlif  ronfs  of  the  vill:i;^i' 
Culiiiriii.s  of  piilc  liliH'  Niii'ikr,  like  clouds  of  iii((  lis.'  ji^ci  iiiliii',', 
HoHf  frojii  ;i  limiilrtMl  ln'urtlm,  the  lioiiics  <if  |iriu:f  iiiid  conti'iitnii-iit. 
Thus  dwi  If  t'lL,!  llitr  in  1  )Vo  tlust,-  siiiiiiU-  Aciidiaii  Kirim-iv-- 
hw<  It  ill  llic  love  of  (!n,I  and  of  man.     Alilcr  wtri-  tl.iy  fni'  from 
l*'<ar,  that  rti/^iis  with  thi;  tyrant,  and  envy,  tht;  vict  of  rujuihlics. 
Ncitlicr  locks  had  tiny  to  their  doorw,  nor  Ikiis  to  their  windows  ; 
l»ut  thiir  dwi  llin;,'H  win-  ojn  11  as  day  and  th'-  hrarts  of  thi;  owners  ; 
There  tile  lii'lufst  was  poor,  and  the  jiooiest  livtd  in  altundance.' 

If  tho  Acadians  who  wore  exiled  in  1755  did  not  all  ex- 
liibit  that  pastoral  sinii)licity  and  worth,  it  is  certain  that 
th(jy  formed,  in  the  main,  an  estimable  comnmnity.  Tlieir 
great  fault,  and  a  fault  which  tlio  exigencies  of  the  times 
made  especially  disastrous  to  them,  was  a  keen  aversion  to 
tlio  J'higlish,  who  had  come  to  intrude  upon  their  quiet  life 
in  the  '  forest  primeval,'  where 

*  The  murmnrinp  pines  and  the  liemlocks, 
Ueardcd  with  nio8.s  and  in  j^farnu^nts  green,  indi.-tinct  in  the  twilight, 
^ualld  like  Druids  of  old,  with  v(»ices  sad  and  prophetic, 
Stand  like  harpers  hoar,  with  beardrt  that  rest  on  their  bosomfl.' 

^luch  of  the  same  primitive  character  appertained  to  those 
who  in  ITGl,  and  the  ensuing  years,  returned  to  their  desolate 
homes,  and  was  by  them  bequeathed  to  their  descendants, 
who  still  reside  in  the  colony. 

Different  in  many  respects  were  the  new  settlers  from 
Britain.  Of  these  settlers  the  number  rose  from  about 
5,000  in  1755  to  more  than  10,000  in  17G4,  and  they  con- 
tinued rapidly  to  increase,  being  recruited  not  only  from 
England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland,  but  also  from  the  more 
southern  colonies,  many  of  whose  people  preferred  the  rule 
of  Great  J3ritain  to  that  of  the  lately  constituted  United 
States  of  America.  In  and  near  1783  some  20,000  of  these 
loyaHsts,  as  they  were  called,  migrated  to  Nova  Scotia. 
Most  of  the  new-comers  preferred  town  life  and  commerce 
to  agricultural  pursuits,  and  the  colony  throve  greatly 
through  their  energy. 

Of  Acadie,  and  accordingly  of  Nova  Scotia,  during  its 
early  government  by  the  English,  the  province  now  known 


o.n 


iH 


THEIR  GROWTH  AS  KXGfJSH  COf.OXIRS. 


09 


0 

id 
a. 


ts 


as  New  lininswick  f(jrinc(l  a  ])art,  and  to  tlic  colony  was 
added  ill  ITOM  tlio  island  of  ('a[)()  Urctoii,  then  finally  taken 
from  tlio  French.  In  tl  e  same  year  the  military  rnle  that  had 
before  prevailed  was  exchan^'ed  for  a  re^'ular  constitution,  in 
which  a  governor,  representiii},'  the  JJritish  crown,  presided 
over  a  Legislativo  (Jouncii  and  a  J  louse  of  AsseiiiMy, 
modelled  to  some  extent  from  the  two  estates  of  the  l-jij^dish 
I'arliament.  This  constitution  was  somewhat  modified  liy 
increase  of  the  functions  of  the  House  of  Assembly,  and  of 
the  nundjer  of  its  members,  on  the  accession  of  George  the 
Tourth  in  LS2(). 

Jiefore  that  date  the  limits  of  Nova  Scotia  liad  been  cur- 
tailed, in  17'Sl  New  Brunswick,  which  then  contained 
about  12,000  inhabitants,  was  made  a  separate  colony.  Capo 
Breton  was  also  treated  in  the  same  way,  but  in  1820  it 
was  restored  to  the  province  of  Nova  Scotia. 

in  the  subsequent  history  of  the  two  colonics,  until  tlicy 
were  merged  in  the  Canadian  Dominion  in  18G7,  but  little 
needs  to  bo  here  recorded.  Both  grew  steadily  in  wealth 
and  population.  In  Nova  Scotia,  then  including  New 
Brunswick  and  Cape  Breton,  there  were  in  ITGi  only  about 
13,000  residents,  both  linglish  and  French.  In  1772  the 
inhabitants  numbered  inore  than  19,000.  In  1783  they 
exceeded  32,000.  In  1807  there  were  in  Nova  Scotia,  ex- 
clusive of  both  Cape  Breton  and  New  Brunswick,  about  Go,000. 
In  1817  it  contained  85,000,  besides  14,000  more  in  Capo 
Breton.  In  1827  the  colonies,  again  united,  contained 
upwards  of  150,000.  In  1847  the  population  amounted  to 
nearly  200,000,  and  in  18G1  it  exceeded  330,000.  The  popu- 
lation of  New  Brunswick,  numbering  about  12,000  when  it 
became  a  separate  colony,  had  risen  to  27,000  in  1803,  to 
35,000  in  1817,  to  119,000  in  1834,  to  150,000  in  1840,  and 
to  250,000  in  18G1. 

To  the  natural  resources  of  these  colonies,  and  the  ad- 
vantages derived  from  them,  reference  will  be  hereafter 
made.  Their  progress  has  been  in  spite  of  occasional 
disasters,  oi  which  one  striking  instance  may  here  be  given. 

7—2 


,i  '! 


lOO 


A'Ol'A  SCOT/ A  A  AD  NEW  niWNSlVJCk' 


1 


'  Tlic  summer  of  .1S25,'  said  a  resident  of  Newcastle,  near 
iNliramichi  J3ay,  on  the  eastern  coast  of  New  J5runswick, 
'  was  unusually  warm  in  both  hemispheres,  particularly  in 
America,  where  its  effects  were  fatally  visible  in  the  preva- 
lence of  epidemic  disorders.  During'  July  and  August  ex- 
tensive lires  raged  in  different  parts  of  Nova  Scotia,  especially 
in  the  c-stcrn  division  of  the  peninsula.  The  protracted 
drought  of  the  sunuucr,  acting  upon  the  aridity  of  the  forests, 
had  rendered  them  more  than  naturally  combustible  ;  and 
this,  facilitating  both  the  dispersion  and  the  progress  of  the 
Ih'es  that  appeared  in  tliC  early  part  of  tlic  season,  produced 
an  unusual  warmth.  On  tlie  Gth  of  October  the  lire  was 
evidently  approaching  Newcastle.  At  different  intervals 
fitful  blazes  and  Hashes  were  observed  to  issue  from  different 
parts  of  the  woods.  ]\Iany  persons  heard  the  crackling  of 
falling  trees  and  shrivelled  branches,  while  a  hoarse  rumbling 
noise,  not  dissinn'lar  to  the  roaring  of  distant  thunder,  and 
divided  by  pauses,  like  the  intermittent  discharges  of  artil- 
lery, was  distinctly  audible.  On  the  17th  of  October  the 
heat  became  \ery  oppressive,  and  at  about  twelve  o'clock  a 
pale  sickly  mist  emerged  from  the  forest  and  settled  over  it. 
Tliis  cloud  soon  retj'eated  before  a  large  dark  one,  which, 
occupying  its  place,  wrapped  the  firmament  in  a  pall  of 
vapour,  and  the  heat  became  tormentingly  sultry.  A  stupe- 
fying dulness  seemed  to  pervade  every  place  but  the  woods, 
which  trembled  and  rustled  and  shook  with  an  incessant 
and  thrilling  noise  of  explosions,  rapidly  following  each 
other.  The  whole  country  appeared  to  be  encircled  by  a, 
liery  zone.  A  little  after  four  o'clock  an  immense  pillar  of 
smoke  rose  in  a  verticp.l  direction,  at  some  distance  north- 
west of  Newcastle,  and  the  sky  was  absolutely  blackened  by 
this  huge  cloud  ;  but,  a  light  northerly  breeze  springing  up, 
it  gradually  distended  and  then  dispersed  in  a  variety  of 
shapeless  mists.  About  an  hour  after,  innumerable  largo 
spires  of  smoke,  issuing  from  different  parts  of  the  woods, 
and  illuminated  by  flames,  mounted  to  the  sky.  The  river, 
tortured  into  violence  by  the  hurricane,  foamed  with  rage, 


A  CO  LOW  JX  FLAMES. 


lOI 


and  flung  its  boiliiif;  spray  upon  tlic  land.  The  thunder 
poalcd  along  the  vault  of  heaven  :  the  lightning  appeared  to 
rend  the  lirnianicnt.  Tor  a  moment  all  was  still.  A  deep, 
awful  silence  reigned  over  everything.  All  nature  appeared 
to  be  hushed,  when  suddenly  a  lengthened  and  sullen  roar 
camo  booming  through  the  forest,  driving  a  thousand  maSsivo 
and  devouring  ilamcs  before  it.  Then  Newcastle,  and 
])ouglastown,  and  the  whole  northern  side  of  the  river,  ex- 
tending from  Ikirtibog  to  the  Naaswaap,  a  distance  of  jnoro 
than  a  hundred  miles  in  length,  became  enveloped  in  an 
immense  sheet  of  flame  tluit  spread  over  nearly  six  thousand 
square  miles.  That  the  stranger  may  form  a  faint  idea  of 
desolation  and  misery  which  no  pen  can  describe,  he  must 
picture  to  himself  a  large  and  rapid  river,  thickly  settled  for 
a  hundred  miles  or  more,  with  four  thriving  towns,  two  on 
each  side  of  it,  and  then  reflect  that  these  towns  and  settle- 
ments were  all  comjiosed  of  wooden  houses,  stores,  stables, 
and  barns,  and  that  the  barns  and  stable.-;  were  filled  with 
crops,  and  that  the  arrival  of  the  fall  importations  had 
stocked  the  warehouses  and  stores  with  spirits,  powder,  and 
a  variety  of  combustible  articles,  as  well  as  with  the  neces- 
sary supplies  for  the  approaching  winter.  lie  must  then 
remember  that  the  settlement  formed  a  long  narrow  strip, 
about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  wide,  lying  between  the  river  and 
almost  interminable  forests,  stretching  along  the  very  edge 
of  its  precincts  and  all  around  it,  and  he  will  have  some  idea 
of  the  extent,  features,  and  general  circumstances  of  the 
country  which,  in  the  course  of  a  few  liours,  was  suddenly 
enveloped  in  fire.  A  more  ghastly  picture  of  human  misery 
cannot  well  be  imagined.  Nothing  broke  upon  the  ear  but 
tlic  accents  of  distress.  The  eye  saw  nothing  but  ruin  and 
desolation  and  death.  Newcastle,  yi  sterday  a  flourishing 
town  containing  nearly  a  thousand  inhabitants,  was  now  a 
heap  of  smoking  ruins,  and  Douglastown  was  reduced  to  the 
same  miserable  condition.  Of  two  hundred  and  sixty  houses 
and  storehouses  in  the  former,  but  twelve  remained.  Of 
seventy  in  the  latter,  only  six  were  left.     The  confusion  on 


fl  ;i 


i. 


ai 

">  \ 

||H 

i 

1  ,'  "J 

||l 

;= 

Jj:H 

i 

II 

.,\  ' 


^ 


1 02         Ac'  I  'A  SCO  TIA  A  i\D  XE I V  ilR  Ui\S  1 1  '/CA'. 

board  a  hundred  and  fifty  largo  vessels,  then  lying  in  the 
Miramichi  and  exposed  to  imminent  danger,  was  terrible  ; 
some  burnt  to  the  water's  edge,  otlicrs  burning,  and  the 
remainder  occasionally  on  fire.  Dispersed  groups  of  half- 
naked,  half-famished,  and  homeless  creatures,  all  more  or 
less  injured  in  their  persons — many  lamenting  the  loss  of 
property,  children  or  relations — were  wandering  through 
the  country.  Upwards  of  five  hundred  human  beings 
perished.  Domestic  animals  of  all  kinds  lay  dead  and  dying 
in  different  parts  of  the  country.  Thousands  of  wild  beasts, 
too,  had  been  destroyed  in  the  woods.  Property  to  the  ex- 
tent of  nearly  a  quarter  of  a  million  was  w^asted.'* 

Not  far  from  the  scene  of  that  terrible  conflagration,  in 
liie  Gulf  of  St.  Lawrence  and  between  New  Brunswick  and 
Cape  Breton,  is  Prince  Edward's  Island,  which,  for  a  brief 
]ieriod,  was  also  part  of  the  colony  of  Nova  Scotia.  It  had 
been  little  used  by  the  French  until  the  conquest  of  Acadie 
by  Great  Britain,  when  many  settlers  crossed  the  narrow 
strait.  In  1758,  however,  it  also  fell  into  the  hands  of  the 
English,  and  its  inhabitants,  like  their  brethren  on  the 
mainland,  were  expelled.  In  1763  it  was  incorporated  with 
Nova  Scotia ;  but  in  1770  it  was  made  a  separate  province 
in  fulfilment  of  a  curious  plan  of  colonization.  It  was 
parcelled  out  in  sixty-seven  townships,  and  these  were  dis- 
tributed by  lottery  among  the  creditors  of  the  English 
Government,  each  of  whom  was  bound  to  lodge  a  settler  in 
every  lot  of  two  hundred  acres  that  fell  to  him.  The 
experiment  was  not  at  first  very  successful,  but  gradually 
the  shares  in  the  island  passed  from  the  original  speculators 
to  men  who  knew  how  to  use-  the  rich  soil  and  unusually 
healthy  climate  of  the  island.  In  1802  it  contained  20, Col 
inhabitants,  of  whom  about  half  were  Scotch,  and  a  quarter 
French.  In  1821  the  population  was  24,600;  in  1841  it 
was  47,034  ;  and  in  1861  in  was  80,857. 

*  Martin,  \o].  I,  pp.  222,  223. 


m 


CHAPTER  IX. 


CANADA. 

TrfK  HISTOnV  OK  CANADA  UN'DER  imiTISIf  lUI.K— Till':  I'lUST  AMF.UK'AN' 
WAU— INTKUNAL  THOlllLKS — TIIK  FUKNCH  ANI>  KNCLISH  CANADIANS  — 
T1!K  SKCOND  AMKUICAN  WAll— t'UKSIl  DOMKSTU;  Dll'l'ICULTlKS — TIIK 
RKIJKM.IOXS  OK  18.'37  AND  1838— I.OHD  Dl'IiHAM's  SKKVICKS  TO  THK 
COLONY — ITS  LATKK  HISTOUY — THK  CANADIAN  CONI'KDIMIATION.  [17G0- 
1867.] 

|'5i5?l^^HE  siuTcncler  of  Canada  to  Great  Britain,  in  17G0, 
'cl^  iMJ  did  not  bring  peace  to  tlic  colony.  Its  French 
inhabitants,  about  60,000  in  number,  \vith  some 
8,000  converted  Indians  among  them,  ^vcre 
allowed  to  remain ;  but  they  were  suddenly 
called  upon  to  submit  themselves  to  English  law,  as  inter- 
preted and  perverted  by  a  few  regimental  oilicers,  and  a  few 
traders  from  England  and  the  older  settlements.  The  latter 
did  not  then  number  more  than  500,  and  their  efforts  to  lay 
violent  hands  on  all  the  richest  portions  of  the  colony,  and 
their  harsh  treatment  of  the  earlier  residents,  strengthened 
the  natural  ill-feeling  of  the  conquered  races.  Tiie  first 
step  towards  the  removal  of  this  was  made  in  the  Quebec 
Act  passed  by  tlie  British  Parliament  in  1774,  which  con- 
firmed the  possessions  of  the  French  occupants,  and  pre- 
served to  them  their  civil  rights  and  customs,  on  condition 
of  their  taking  an  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  British  Crown  ; 
but  it  offender.  tL^  English  settlers  without  pacifying  those 
whom   it   undertook  to   befriend.     The   Earl   of  Chatham 


f 


:|1 

ill    '^■ 


;-i. 


ff'il-i 


m 


!l 


■I?: 


104 


CANADA. 


flcnounccd  it  as  'a  most  cruel,  oppressive  and  odious 
measure,  tearing  up  justice  and  every  good  principle  by  the 
roots.' 

Other  troubles  soon  arose,  both  for  the  Froncli  Canadians 
and  for  the  English  settlers  among  them.  Discontent  at 
the  policy  adopted  by  the  Home  Government  had  long  pre- 
vailed in  the  minds  of  the  English  colonists  south  of  the  St. 
La^vrence,  and  the  threatened  rupture  between  them  and 
the  mother  country,  deferred  in  order  that  their  common 
force  might  be  exerted  against  the  encroachments  of  the 
French,  received  fresh  strength  from  the  new  jealousies  that 
sprang  up  in  the  course  of  the  Canadian  war.  No  sooner 
was  that  war  over  than  the  indignant  colonists  began  to 
claim  better  treatment  from  the  British  Government,  and 
the  unwise  answers  given  to  their  reasonable  claims  led  to 
bolder  assertions  on  the  part  of  the  colonists,  which  were 
met  by  more  foolish  replies  from  home.  Thus  the  great 
American  War  of  Independence  was  brought  about,  blood 
being  first  shed  at  the  Battle  of  Lexington,  in  1775,  and  the 
result  being  England's  loss  of  her  richest  colonies,  and  their 
establishment  as  the  United  States  of  America. 

The  Canadians  were  asked  by  the  first  Congress  of  the 
States  to  join  in  the  revolution,  or,  at  any  rate,  to  be  neutral 
during  the  war.  But  the  sometime  French  on  the  north  of 
the  St.  Lawrence  had  no  sympathy  with  the  sometime 
English  on  the  south.  They  welcomed  the  crowd  of 
loyalists,  as  they  were  called,  who,  crossing  the  river,  came 
to  continue  their  allegiance  to  the  British  Crown  in  Quebec 
and  Montreal ;  and  prompt  measures  were  taken  to  renew 
the  defences  of  the  border,  and  to  support  the  mother 
country  in  her  efforts  to  suppress  the  revolution.  Old 
Canadians,  who  had  done  battle  with  British  troops,  now 
prepared  to  fight  by  their  side,  and  colonial  loyalists,  who 
had  lately  taken  part  with  their  brethren  in  the  conquest  of 
Canada,  now  made  ready  to  turn  their  anns  against  their 
former  comrades. 

Seeing  that  thus  a  formidable  enemy  was  growing  up,  and 


!     !i 


^n 


' 


THE  FIRST  AMERICAN  WAR. 


105 


believing  that,  if  they  could  get  possession  of  the  northern 
districts,  many  of  its  people  would  be  friendly  to  them,  and 
all  might  be  soon  subdued,  the  champions  of  independence 
quickly  resolved  upon  the  invasion  of  Canada.     A  force  of 
4,000  men,  in  two  divisions,  set  out  upon  this  enterprise  in 
the  autumn  of   1775.     The  main  division,  under  General 
Montgomery,    was     at     first     successful.      Chambly,    St. 
John's,  and   Montreal,  in  turn  attacked  by  Montgomery, 
soon  yielded  to  him.     But  Benedict  Arnold,  at  the  head  of 
the  other  division,  fared  ill  in  his  attempt  upon  Quebec. 
Scant  provisions  and  bad  weather  caused  trouble  on  the 
march,  and  the   garrison  of   Quebec   held   out   till  it  was 
reinforced  by  fugitives  from  Montreal  and  the  other  captured 
forts.     The  conquerors  of  these  forts  passed  down  the  St. 
Lawrence   to   aid   their   comrades,  and   in   December   the 
whole  besieging  force  was  united,  under  Montgomery,  to 
attack  Quebec,  in  which   nearly  all   the   defenders  of  the 
colony  were   congregated.     They   were   not   thought   very 
formidable.     Only  900  British  troops  were  there,  and  it  was 
expected   that   the   civilians   under  arms   would   easily  bo 
turned   from   their   allegiance.      But   they  were   firm   and 
brave.     On  the  8th  of  December,  Montgomery  summoned 
the   town   to   surrender.     His   flag  was   fired  on,  and  his 
messengers  were  ignominiously  expelled.     After  some  other 
futile  efforts,  Montgomery  attempted,  on  the  31st,  to  sur- 
prise the  town  by  a  device  similar  to  that  in  which,  as  a 
subordinate,  he  had  shared  with  Wolfe  sixteen  years  before. 
Like  Wolfe,   he  paid  for  his  valour  with  his  life  on   the 
heights  of  Abraham.     But  there  the  likeness  ended.     The 
assailants,  panic-struck  at  their  loss,  hastily  retreated ;  and, 
in  spite  of  the  energy  shown  by  Arnold,  they  refused  to 
repeat  the  attack.     They  loitered  in  Canada  and  its  neigh- 
bourhood for  several  months,  and  reinforcements  came  from 
New  England.     But   reinforcements   also   came   from  Old 
England.     The  intruders  were  expelled,  step  by  step,  from 
Montreal  and  all  the  other  forts  which  they  had  taken,  and 
iu  September,  1776,  the  wreck  of  the  invading  army  went 


!!!l 


1     ' 


! 

.  i 

.  ;   If 

'1 

;   1 

1 

'   1 

ffh" 

■A 

■j  ■ 

1 

'    -^ 


1 06 


CANADA. 


i*    H 


•* 


home  to  report  that  the  attempt  to  conquer  Canada  was 
hopeless. 

Canada  suffered  much  by  this  war,  but  its  gains  were 
greater  than  its  losoos  through  the  increased  strength  which 
it  received  from  Britain,  and  the  steady  tide  of  loyaHst 
immigration  from  the  south.  Its  defences  were  augmented 
and  maintained  until  the  close  of  the  A.ncrican  war  in  1783, 
when  tliere  was  thought  to  be  no  further  danger  of  inva- 
sion. In  that  year  the  population  was  more  than  twice  as 
numerous  as  it  had  been  at  tlie  beginning  of  Enghsh  rule  in 
1760.  The  60,000  or  70,000  French  residents  were  asso- 
ciated with  60,000  or  70,000  Enghsh  colonists  and  refugees 
from  the  United  States. 

Between  these  different  races,  however,  no  great  friendship 
arose,  and  the  differences  were  hardly  removed  by  time. 
They  prevailed  almost  without  abatement  through  seventy- 
five  years  of  English  rule,  and  in  1838  they  were  forcibly 
described  by  the  Earl  of  Durham,  who  had  been  specially 
commissioned  to  inquire  into  the  condition  of  the  colony. 
*  Among  the  people,'  he  said,  *  the  progress  of  emigration 
has  introduced  an  English  population,  exhibiting  the 
characteristics  with  which  we  are  familiar  as  those  of  the 
most  enterprising  of  every  class  of  our  countrymen.  The 
circumstances  of  the  early  colonial  administration  excluded 
the  native  Canadian  from  power,  and  vested  all  offices  of 
trust  and  emolument  in  the  hands  of  strangers  of  English 
origin.  The  highest  posts  in  the  law  are  confided  to  the 
same  class  of  persons.  The  functionaries  of  the  civil  govern- 
ment, together  with  the  officers  of  tlie  army,  composed  a 
kind  of  privileged  class,  occupying  the  first  place  in  the 
community,  and  excluding  the  higher  class  of  the  natives 
from  society,  as  well  as  from  the  government  of  their  own 
country.  It  was  not  till  within  a  very  fev/  years  that  this 
society  of  civil  and  military  functionaries  ceased  to  exhibit 
towards  the  highest  order  of  Canadians  an  exclusiveness  of 
demeanour  which  was  more  revolting  to  a  sensitive  and 
polite  people  than  the  monopoly  of  power  and  profit ;  nor 


!'■  l\ 


ITS  RIVAL  RACES. 


107 


us 
)it 
lof 
lid 

lor 


was  this  national  favouritisin  discontinued  until  after 
repeated  complaints  and  an  angry  contest,  which  had 
excited  passions  that  commissions  could  not  allay.  Tlic 
races  had  become  enemies  ere  a  tardy  justice  was  extorted  ; 
and  even  then  the  Government  discovered  a  mode  of  distribu- 
ting its  patronage  among  the  Canadians  which  was  quite  as 
offensive  to  that  people  as  their  previous  exclusion.' 

The  same  jealousies  that  separated  the  wealthier 
and  more  high-born  residents  of  Canada  divided  the 
humbler  members  of  society.  '  I  do  not  believe/  continued 
Lord  Durham,  *  that  the  animosity  which  exists  between 
the  working  classes  of  the  two  origins  is  the  necessary  result 
of  a  collision  of  interests,  or  of  a  jealousy  of  the  superior 
success  of  English  labour.  But  national  prejudices  naturally 
exercise  the  greatest  iniluence  over  the  most  uneducated  ; 
the  difference  of  language  is  less  easily  overcome ;  the 
differences  of  manners  and  customs  are  less  easily  appre- 
ciated. The  labourers  whom  emigration  introduced  con- 
tained a  number  of  very  ignorant,  turbulent,  and  demoralized 
persons,  whose  conduct  and  manners  alike  revolted  the  well- 
ordered  and  courteous  natives  of  the  same  class.  The 
working  men  naturally  ranged  themselves  on  the  side  of  the 
educated  and  wealthy  of  their  own  countrymen.  W^hen 
once  engaged  in  the  conflict,  their  passions  were  less 
restrained  by  education  and  prudence  ;  and  the  national 
hostility  now  rages  most  fiercely  between  those  whose 
interests  in  reality  bring  them  least  into  collision.  The  two 
races  thus  distinct  have  been  brought  into  the  same 
community,  under  circumstances  which  rendered  their 
contact  inevitably  productive  of  collision.  The  difference  of 
language  from  the  first  kept  them  asunder.  It  is  not 
anywhere  a  virtue  of  the  English  race  to  look  with  com- 
placency on  any  manners,  customs,  or  laws  w^liich  appear 
strange  to  them.  Accustomed  to  form  a  high  estimate  of 
their  own  superiority,  they  take  no  pains  to  conceal  from 
others  their  contempt  and  intolerance  of  their  usages.  They 
found  the  French  Canadians  filled  with  an  equal  amount  of 


■H'  ! 


i  ■■. 


I.rii 


!i  ■'> 


iri 


108 


CANADA. 


national  prido,  a  sensitive  but  inactive  pride,  which  disposes 
that  people  not  to  resent  insult,  but  rather  to  hold  aloof 
from  those  who  would  keep  them  under.  The  French 
could  not  but  feel  the  superiority  of  English  enterprise. 
They  could  not  shut  their  eyes  to  their  success  in  every 
undertaking  in  whicli  they  came  in  contact,  n*jr  to  the 
constant  advantage  which  they  were  acquiring.  They 
looked  upon  their  rivals  with  alarm,  with  jealousy,  and 
finally  with  hatred.  The  English  repaid  them  -"'ith  a  scorn 
which  soon  also  assumed  the  form  of  hatred.  The  French 
complained  of  the  arrogance  and  injustice  of  the  English. 
The  English  accused  the  French  of  the  vices  of  a  weak 
and  conquered  people,  and  charged  them  with  mean- 
ness and  perfidy.  The  entire  mistrust  which  the  two  races 
have  thus  learned  to  conceive  of  each  other's  intentions 
induces  them  to  put  the  worst  construction  on  the  most 
innocent  conduct,  to  judge  every  word,  every  act,  every 
intention  unfairly,  to  attribute  the  most  odious  designs,  and 
to  requite  every  overture  of  kindness  or  fairness  as  covering 
secret  treachery  and  malignity.  No  common  education  has 
served  to  remote  and  soften  the  differences  of  origin  and 
language.  The  associations  of  youth,  the  sports  of  child- 
hood, and  the  studies  by  which  the  character  of  manhood  is 
modified,  are  totally  distinct.  In  Montreal  and  Quebec 
there  are  English  schools  and  French  schools.  The  children 
in  these  are  accustomed  to  fight  nation  against  nation,  and 
the  quarrels  that  arise  among  boys  in  the  streets  usually 
exhibit  a  division  into  English  on  one  side  and  French  on 
the  other.  As  they  are  taught  apart,  so  are  their  studies 
different.  The  literature  with  which  each  is  the  most 
conversant  is  that  of  the  peculiar  language  of  each  ;  and  all 
the  ideas  which  men  derive  from  books  come  to  each  of 
them  from  perfectly  different  sources.  The  articles  in  the 
newspapers  of  each  race  are  written  in  a  style  as  widely 
different  as  those  of  France  and  England  at  present,  and  the 
arguments  which  convince  the  one  are  calculated  to  appear 
utterly  unintelligible  to  the  other.     It  is  difficult  to  conceive 


ITS  RIVAL  RACES. 


109 


the  perversity  \vitli  which  misrepreseutations  are  habitually 
made,  and  the  gross  delusions  which  find  currency  among 
the  people.  They  thus  live  in  a  world  of  misconceptions,  in 
which  each  party  is  set  against  the  other,  not  only  by 
diversity  of  feelings  and  opinions,  but  by  actual  belief  in  an 
entirely  different  set  of  facts.  Nothing,  though  it*  will 
sound  paradoxical,  really  proves  their  entire  separation  so 
niuch  as  the  rarity,  nay,  almost  total  absence,  of  personal 
encounters  between  the  two  races.  Disputes  of  this  kind 
are  almoi:  confined  to  the  ruder  order  of  people,  and  seldom 
proceed  to  acts  of  violence.  As  respects  the  other  classes, 
social  intercourse  between  the  two  races  is  so  limited  that 
the  more  prominent  or  excitable  antagonists  never  meet  in 
the  same  room.  The  ordinary  occasions  of  collision  never 
occur,  and  men  must  quarrel  so  publicly  or  so  deliberately 
that  prudence  restrains  them  from  commencing  individually 
what  would  probably  end  in  a  general  and  bloody  conflict  of 
numbers.  The  two  parties  combine  for  no  public  object. 
They  cannot  harmonize  even  in  associations  of  charity. 
The  only  public  occasion  on  which  they  ever  meet  is  in  the 
jury-box  ;  and  they  meet  there  only  to  the  utter  obstruction 
of  justice.** 

Efforts  were  made  at  a  very  early  date  by  the  English 
Government,  though  not  with  much  result,  to  lessen  tliese 
differences  of  race  and  disposition,  or,  at  any  rate,  to  prevent 
them  from  breeding  dissensions  that  might  be  ruinous  to  the 
colony.  But  the  work  was  not  easy.  The  English,  chiefly 
reriident  in  the  western  parts,  near  Montreal,  had  been 
accustomed  to  a  certain  amount  of  political  power  at  home, 
and  the  loyalists  from  the  United  States  who  associated 
with  them  had  enjoyed  fuller  freedom  ;  and  to  satisfy  their 
demands,  as  well  as  to  meet  the  urgent  need  of  better 
government  in  the  colony,  it  was  in  1791  decided  to  form  a 
representative  assembly,  for  which  each  forty-shilling  free- 
holder had  the  franchise,  which  should  be  associated  with 
the  governor  and  a  council  appointed  by  the  Crown  in  caring 

*  Canadian  Blue-book,  1839. 


'1 


R     i 


t         ■ 

4 

^  t       '1 

i    -   ■*  ■ 

'I 

,  ■    :' 

i  Ifi ' 

>, 

t.ii'j.- 

f-ii 


i:    ) 


$ 


! 


Ii     i 


I  10 


CANADA. 


for  the  lo^MsliitivG  and  adiniiiistmtivc  affairs  of  Canada.  But 
tlic  IVcncli  settlors  in  and  around  Quebee,  accustomed  to 
the  despotic  rule  of  tlio  House  of  Bourbon  aud  its  deputies, 
tliought  this  no  boon.  '  It  is  our  I'eh/^'ion,  our  huvs  reUiting 
to  property,  and  our  personal  security,  in  which  we  are  most 
interested,'  they  said  in  1778,  when  tiie  question  was  first 
mooted  ;  '  and  these  we  enjoy  in  the  most  ample  maimer  by 
the  Quebec  Jiill.  We  are  the  more  averse  to  a  House  of 
Assembly  from  the  fatal  consequences  which  will  result  from 
it.  Can  we,  as  Catholics,  hope  to  preserve  for  any  len^^th  of 
time  the  same  prerogatives  as  Vrotestant  subjects,  in  a 
House  of  Representatives  ?  and  will  there  not  come  a  time 
when  the  influence  of  the  latter  will  over-balance  that  of  our 
posterity  ?  In  this  case,  should  wo  and  our  posterity  enjoy 
the  same  advantages  which  our  present  constitution  secures 
to  us  ?  Shall  we  not  fear  that  we  may  one  day  sec  the  seeds 
of  dissension  created  by  the  Assembly  of  Representatives, 
and  nourished  by  those  intestine  hatreds  which  the  opposite 
interests  of  the  old  and  the  new  subjects  will  naturally  give 
birth  to  ?'*  It  was  partly  in  deference  to  those  prejudices 
that,  while  representative  institutions  were  forced  on  t,ho 
French  Canadians,  they  were  allowed  to  use  them  chiefly 
among  themselves,  by  the  separation  of  the  colony  into  two 
provinces,  each  with  its  own  popular  chamber.  In  1791,  the 
western  district,  extending  from  the  borders  of  Montreal  to 
the  River  Detroit,  and  including  the  whole  promontory 
formed  by  Lakes  Ontario,  Erie,  and  Huron,  was  defined  as 
Upper  Canada;  while  Lower  Canada,  mainly  peopled  by  the 
Ereucli  natives,  stretched  eastward,  on  both  sides  of  the  St. 
Lawrence,  to  Quebec,  aud  thence  on  to  the  mouth  of  the 
river  and  the  borders  of  New  Brunswick. 

Lower  Canada,  containing  both  the  chief  cities,  was  then 
and  till  lately  the  most  populous  province.  Within  an  area 
of  205,800  square  miles,  nearly  four  times  as  large  as  England, 
it  had  about  113,000  inhabitants  in  1784  ;  423,630  in  1825  ; 
511,922  in  1831  :  690,782  in  1844  :  890,261  in  1852 ;  and 


Mart 


in,  V 


ol. 


p.  10. 


rilE  UPPER  AND  LOWER  PR017XCES. 


1 1 1 


1, 111,500  ill  1801.  Upper  Canada,  not  quite  tlu-ico  tlio  sizo 
of  En^'land,  and  comprising  141,000  squai'u  miles,  was  almost 
uninl'dbited  before  the  close  of  the  eigliteenth  century.  It 
contained  77,000  inhabitants  in  1811  ;  151,097  in  1824  ; 
320,093  in  1831 ;  480,050  in  1842 ;  952,004  in  1852 ;  and 
1,390,091  in  1801.  Its  population  was  more  than  doubled 
in  each  period  of  twelve  years,  while  Lower  Canada  required 
nearly  twenty-four  years  for  a  like  ^'rowth.  This  has  been 
mainly  duo  to  the  circumstance  that  the  western  districts 
were  already  distributed  among  the  French  families,  whoso 
vested  interests,  however  much  to  be  respected,  were  a  great 
obstacle  to  the  free  settlement  of  English  innnigrants,  and 
that  the  latter  therefore  went  to  build  their  owu  towns  and 
cities  in  quarters  previously  unoccupied. 

Differences  of  race  were  not  the  only  obstacles  to  the  full 
development  of  Lower  Canada,  but  they  were  sufliciently 
serious.  In  spite  of  the  large  proportioji  of  French  liahUaits, 
as  they  w^ere  called,  in  the  province,  they  were  outnumbered 
by  English  settlers,  and,  which  was  worse,  they  were  kept 
under  by  the  military  and  civil  oflicers  who  had  most  weight 
with  the  authorities.  Over  and  over  again  they  had  to  com- 
plain that  the  representative  privileges  accorded  to  them 
were  worse  than  useless,  as  the  whole  government  of  the 
colony  wao  in  the  hands  of  the  Legislative  Council,  to  which 
none  but  Englishmen  were  admitted. 

In  1807  there  was  an  open  rupture  between  the  House  of 
Assembly  and  the  Legislative  Council.  The  Assembly  was 
dissolved ;  a  French  newspaper  was  suppressed ;  and  six 
persons  were  imprisoned  without  trial.  The  '  reign  of  terror,' 
as  it  was  styled  in  Canadian  circles,  lasted  till  1811,  when  a 
new  governor  arrived,  whose  conciliatory  action  prevented 
any  serious  disturbance.  But  the  habitans  continued  dis- 
satisfied with  their  position  in  the  colony. 

Of  this  dissatisfaction  the  Americans  sought  to  make  evil 
use.  In  1812  war  arose  between  the  United  States  and 
England,  and  the  conquest  of  Canada  was  again  attempted 
by  the  former.    'We  can  take  the  Canadas  without  soldiers,' 


*     ! 


■1  lU  J 


■t  ,i-i 


IPHP 


1  12 


CAXADA. 


':    I 


^ 


Ktiid  tli(3  Secretary  at  War  in  Congress.  '  Wo  liavo  only  to 
send  ollicers  into  the  provinces,  and  tlio  people,  disaffected 
towards  their  own  Govennneiit,  will  rally  round  our 
standard.'  'It  is  absurd,'  said  another,  '  to  suppose  that  wo 
shall  not  succeed  in  our  enterprise.  We  have  the  Canadians 
as  much  at  our  connnand  as  Great  Biitain  has  the  ocean. 
Wo  must  take  the  continent  from  her.  I  wish  never  to  sec 
peace  till  we  do  so.'* 

The  Americans  misjudged  tho  disposition  of  tho  French 
Canadians.  The  latter  desired  justice  from  Englai  d  ;  but 
they  had  no  wish  to  swerve  from  their  allegiance,  and  they 
had  no  liking  for  the  republicanism,  in  their  judgment  violent 
and  offensive,  of  tho  United  States.  Within  six  weeks  they 
organized  and  equipped  four  fine  battalions  of  nulitia,  tho 
Canadian  Voltigeurs,  and  in  other  ways  gave  proof  of  their 
devotion  to  tho  cause  of  England.  An  American  expedition 
was  promptly  fitted  out  for  the  invasion  of  Canada,  but  its 
inhabitants  of  both  races  wero  no  less  prom^Jt  in  preparing 
to  resist  it. 

Ou  the  12th  of  July,  an  American  force,  2,500  strong, 
entered  Upper  Canada  from  Detroit,  and  took  possession  of 
Sandwich  ;  but  General  Brock,  then  governor  of  the  pro- 
vince, quickly  gathering  together  a  little  army,  consisting  of 
330  regulars,  400  militiamen,  and  GOO  Indians,  soon  drove 
the  enemy  back  to  Detroit,  and,  crossing  the  river,  invested 
that  fort  and  compelled  its  surrender.  Two  months  after- 
wards a  stronger  invading  army,  numbering  6,000  men,  again 
crossed  the  frontier,  this  time  at  Niagara,  and  overpowered 
the  small  garrison  that  had  charge  of  QueenstoAvn.  Again 
Brock  went  to  meet  the  enemy.  He  was  killed,  and  his 
small  force  was  not  successful ;  but  soon  some  British  troops 
arrived,  and  by  them  the  Americans  were  forced  to  retreat. 
A  third  invasion  was  attempted  at  Fort  Erie ;  but  there 
4,500  of  the  enemy  were  repnlsed  by  Canadian  volunteers 
and  a  few  British  troops,  600  in  all. 

Those  were  the  exploits  of  the  first  year  of  the  new  Cana- 

*  Martin,  vol.  i.,  p.  17. 


THE  SECOND  AMERICAN  WAR. 


11.1 


dian  war.  Jii  1813  tliu  AmuricaiiH,  -,till  iR'licviiif;  tliat,  if 
tlioy  could  only  },'aiii  a  footing  in  tlic  west,  the  I'Vuuch  in  ti»o 
cast  would  willingly  join  their  Bide,  renewed  their  attacks  on 
Upper  Canada.  Herein  they  were  more  successful  than 
they  had  been  in  the  previous  year.  In  April,  crossin*:;  Lake 
Ontario,  they  surprised  Y^rk,  now  Toronto,  the  capital  of 
the  province,  and  destroyed  its  public  buildings.  Fort 
George  also  fell  into  their  hands,  after  desperate  resistance. 
For  some  months  they  were  masters  of  the  most  populous 
parts  of  Upjer  Canada  ;  and,  in  October,  14,000  men,  in 
two  detachments,  taking  different  routes,  were  sent  against 
Montreal.  The  first,  however,  6,000  strong,  was  met  and 
defeated  by  800  volunteers,  chiefly  French  and  Indians, 
under  Colonel  do  Salaberry ;  and  the  other  had  to  yield  to 
the  main  body  of  the  regular  troops  in  Lower  Canada,  who 
were  sent  out  to  resist  it.  The  earlier  successes  of  the 
invaders  were  thus  neutralized. 

In  the  following  year  Upper  Canada  was  again  assailed 
with  some  success.  Fort  Eric  was  captured,  and  much 
injury  was  done  to  the  neighbouring  settlements  before  the 
Canadians,  nearly  exhausted  by  a  contest  which  they  had 
had  to  maintain  with  very  scant  help  from  England,  could 
hold  their  own  against  the  enemy,  and  then  nothing  but 
rare  bravery  sustained  them.  On  the  25th  of  July  the 
battle  of  Lundy's  Lane,  near  tlie  falls  of  Niagara,  was 
fought.  From  afternoon  till  midnight  4,000  Americans 
were  withstood  by  2,800  Canadians  and  Englishmen.  Of 
their  number  878  were  killed  and  wounded  before  the 
enemy,  with  a  loss  of  854,  were  driven  back  to  Fort  Erie. 
That  fort  was  then  besieged  by  General  Drunnnond  ;  but  in 
a  single  attack  he  lost  905  of  his  men  against  84  of  the  foe, 
and  after  that  could  do  no  more  than  maintain  a  feeble 
blockade.  The  Canadians  must  have  succumbed  had  not 
the  cessation  of  England's  long  European  war  in  1814 
released  her  troops  and  ships  from  yet  more  urgent  work, 
and  enabled  her  to  despatch  an  adequate  force  across  the 
Atlantic.    This  was  promptly  done,  and  with  a  speedy  issue. 

8 


V 


r'i 


»l 


'  -f    > 

1 

\          ,) 

1 

iiiiJ 

""WMHiiil 


114 


CANADA. 


Kciuforcemcnts  were  sent  to  Canada,  but  the  great  scene  of 
the  war  was  transferred  to  the  enemy's  own  country. 
Washington  was  attacked  and  captured,  and  the  British 
then  retaliated  for  the  destruction  of  property  that  had 
occurred  in  Upper  Canada.  The  Americans  found  now  that 
their  case  was  liopeless,  and  readily  agreed  to  the  treaty  of 
peace  that  was  signed  on  Christmas  Eve  in  1814.  Canada 
was  henceforth  free  from  invasion,  and  from  serious  fear  of 
it,  at  the  hands  of  the  United  States. 

Before  the  mischief  done  by  the  fighting  had  been  thoroughly 
repaired,  however,  domestic  troubles  were  renewed.  The 
French  Canadians  in  the  eastern  province  were  ill  repaid 
for  tlie  loyalty  they  had  shown  during  the  war.  Imme- 
diately after  the  restoration  of  peace,  the  old  insults  were 
revived,  and  their  efforts  to  assert  their  claims  in  the  House 
of  Assembly  were  treated  with  ignominy  by  the  English 
party,  v/liich  had  supremacy  in  the  governing  councils. 
'  For  a  long  time,'  said  the  Earl  of  Durham,  in  the  docu- 
ment which  has  already  been  cited,  *  this  body  of  men, 
receiving  at  times  accessions  to  its  numbers,  possessed 
almost  all  the  highest  public  oJSices,  by  means  of  which  it 
wielded  all  the  powers  of  government.  It  maintained  in- 
fluence in  the  legislature  by  means  of  its  predominance  in 
the  Legislative  Council,  and  it  disposed  of  the  large  number 
of  petty  posts  which  are  in  the  patronage  of  the  Government 
ail  over  the  province,  Successive  Governors,  as  they  came 
in  their  turn,  are  said  to  have  either  submitted  quietly  to  its 
influence,  or,  after  a  short  and  unavailing  struggle,  to  have 
yielded  to  it  the  real  conduct  of  affairs.  The.  bench,  the 
magistracy,  the  high  oflices  of  the  Episcopal  Church,  and  a 
great  part  of  the  legal  profession,  are  filled  by  the  adherents 
of  this  party.  By  grant  or  purchase  they  have  acquired  nearly 
the  whole  of  the  waste  lands  of  the  province.  They  are  all- 
powerful  in  the  chartered  banks,  and  lill  lately  shared 
amongst  themselves,  almost  exclusively,  all  offices  of  trust 
and  profit.  A  monopoly  of  power  so  extensive  and  so  last- 
ing could  not  fail,  in  process  of  time,  to  excite  envy,  create 


MISGOVERNMENT  AND  ITS  FRUITS. 


115 


re 


a 


1st 
]t- 


dissatisfaction,  aud  ultimately  provoke  attack  ;  aud  an  oppo- 
sition consequently  grew  up  in  the  Assembly,  which  assailed 
the  ruling  party  by  appealing  to  popular  principles  of  govern- 
ment, by  denouncing  the  alleged  jobbing  and  profusion  of 
the  ofiicial  body,  and  by  instituting  inquiries  into  abuses  for 
the  purpose  of  promoting  reform,  and  especially  ecctnomy. 
The  official  party,  not  being  removed  when  it  failed  to  com- 
mand a  majority  in  the  Assembly,  still  continued  to  wieid  all 
the  powers  of  the  executive  government,  to  strengthen  itself 
by  its  patronage,  aud  to  influence  the  policy  of  the  colonial 
governor,  and  of  the  colonial  department  at  home.  By  its 
secure  majority  in  the  Legislative  Council  it  could  effectually 
control  the  legislative  powers  of  the  Assembly.  It  could 
choose  its  moments  for  dissolving  hostile  Assemblies,  and 
could  always  ensure  for  those  who  were  favourable  to  itself 
the  tenure  of  their  seats  for  the  full  term  of  the  four  years 
allowed  by  law.' 

Of  that  sort  was  the  political  feud  that  existed  and  seri- 
ously hindered  the  progress  of  Lower  Canada  in  all  ways 
during  more  than  twenty  years  following  the  termination  of 
the  war  with  the  United  States.  In  1831  the  British  Par- 
liament decided  that  the  House  of  Assembly  should  have 
control  over  the  colonial  revenues,  thus  conceding  one  point 
which  had  long  been  a  source  of  reasonable  complaint ;  but 
the  ofhcial  party,  forced  to  yield  in  this  respect,  became 
more  tyrannical  in  others,  and  the  result  was  that  greater 
discontent  than  ever  prevailed.  In  1835  a  Eoyal  Commis- 
sion was  sent  out  to  investigate  this  unfortunate  state  of 
affairs  and  suggest  a  remedy  ;  but  no  material  benefit  re- 
sulted from  its  proceedings. 

In  the  meanwhile  a  similar  and  even  more  violent  an- 
tagonism had  been  established  iu  Upper  Canada,  now  a 
province  almost  as  populous  as  the  other.  Here  an  otlicial 
party  also  had  supremacy  in  the  Legislative  Council,  and  set 
at  naught  the  opinions  and  decisions  of  the  House  of 
Assembly ;  but  the  members  of  the  House  of  Assembly  and 
those  who  elected  them  were  not  French  habitaiis,  but  rough 

8—2 


fi  .„ 


I : 


"fp 


t  '4  'I 


ii6 


CANADA. 


4;  |. 


^ 


f 


Englishmen,  more  outspoken  in  their  demands,  and  more 
determined  that  those  demands  should  be  complied  witli. 
Whereas  in  the  eastern  provinces  none  did  more  than  com- 
plain, and  offer  such  resistance  as  was  strictly  legal,  the 
extreme  section  of  the  popular  party  in  the  west  soon 
resolved  to  take  tiie  law  into  its  own  hands.  In  Decem- 
ber some  five  or  six  hundred  of  this  section,  headed  by 
a  man  named  Mackenzie,  assembled  a  few  miles  from 
Toronto,  intending  to  surprise  the  city  and  instigate  an 
insurrection  for  transferring  the  whole  province  to  the 
United  States.  Sir  Francis  Head,  the  Governor,  however, 
was  warned  of  the  project  in  time.  By  him  a  strong  force 
of  volunteers  and  militia  was  quickly  mustered  for  the 
defence  of  Toronto,  and  he  called  on  the  rebels  to  sur- 
render their  arms.  On  their  refusing,  the  volunteers  and 
militia,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  M'Nab,  the  Speaker  of  the 
House  of  Assembly,  went  cut  to  compel  them,  and  this  was 
quickly  done,  with  loss  of  but  a  few  of  the  insurgents.  The 
'  rebellion  '  of  1837,  as  it  was  called,  only  lasted  three  days, 
and  in  it  were  implicated  only  a  few  of  the  most  ignorant 
and  least  influential  colonists.  But  it  gave  reasonable  alarm, 
both  in  the  colony  and  at  home  ;  and  its  occurrence,  together 
with  the  long-continued  feuds  between  the  Legislative  Coun- 
cil and  the  House  of  Assembly  in  each  of  the  two  provinces, 
made  it  necessary  that  something  should  be  done  to  remedy 
the  existing  evils.  Accordingly,  in  1838,  the  Earl  of  Durham, 
a  statesman  of  rare  wisdom  and  ability,  was  sent  out  as 
Governor-General  of  all  the  colonies  in  British  North  America, 
especially  with  a  view  to  *  the  adjustment  of  certain  im- 
portant questions  depending  in  the  provinces  of  East  and 
West  Canada  respecting  the  form  and  future  government  of 
the  said  provinces.' 

Lord  Durham's  mission  to  Canada  marks  a  turning-point 
in  its  history.  He  visited  all  the  principal  stations  in  the 
colony,  and  in  each  made  careful  inquiry  as  to  the  state  of 
the  people,  and  the  requirements  for  their  good  government. 
In  the  end  he  recommended  that  the  two  provinces  should 


LORD  DURHAM'S  MISSION. 


117 


be  reunited,  with  a  single  legislative  and  administrative 
system,  in  which  the  Governor  should  be  aided  by  a  Legisla- 
tive Council  in  sympathy  with  the  people  and  with  their 
representatives  in  the  House  of  Assembly;  and  that  that 
body  should  have  powers  of  legislation  and  control  over  the 
administration  equal  to  those  possessed  by  the  .British 
House  of  Commons.  He  also  recommended  such  a  union 
of  all  the  British  North  American  colonies  as  was  inaugu- 
rated in  1867.  *  Our  first  duty,'  he  nohly  urged,  *  is  to 
secure  the  well-being  of  our  colonial  countrymen ;  and  if, 
in  the  hidden  decrees  of  that  wisdom  by  which  the  world 
is  ruled,  it  is  written  that  these  countries  are  not  for  ever 
to  remain  portions  of  the  empire,  we  owe  it  to  our  honour 
to  take  good  care  that,  when  they  separate  from  us,  they 
should  not  be  the  only  countries  on  the  American  continent 
in  which  the  Anglo-Saxon  race  shall  be  found  unfit  to 
govern  itself.' 

Lord  Dui'ham's  suggestions  had  not  reached  England 
when  fresh  evidence  of  the  need  of  their  adoption,  or  at 
any  rate  of  some  sound  remedial  measures  regarding  Canada, 
was  afforded  by  a  second  rebellion,  small,  but  larger  than 
the  first,  which  broke  out  in  November,  1838.  Its  fore- 
runner had  revived  in  the  United  States  the  hope  of  annex- 
ing the  prosperous  district  north  of  the  St.  Lawrence  ;  and 
by  some  lawless  subjects,  who  received  no  countenance  from 
the  Government,  and  whose  action  somewhat  resembled 
that  of  the  supporters  of  the  Fenian  agitation  in  our  own 
day,  the  second  rising  was  encouraged.  It  consisted  in  an 
attempt,  by  about  four  thousand  persons,  to  effect  a  rising 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Montreal.  But  within  less  than  a 
week  they  were  subdued  by  two  hundred  volunteers,  who, 
in  a  contest  lasting  two  hours  and  a  half,  had  fifteen  of 
their  number  killed  and  wounded,  the  loss  of  the  insurgents 
being  about  a  hundred. 

The  most  important  suggestions  of  the  Earl  of  Durham 
were  adopted  in  1841,  when  Upper  and  Lower  Canada  were 
provided  with  a  single  legislature,  consisting  of  a  Legislative 


M  '1 


W 


s\ 


'\ 


■^  \ 


I 


I 


'A   ^T  \ 


1(1 


"mmm 


<) 


«r 


ii8 


CANADA. 


Assembly,  to  which  forty-two  representatives  were  sent  by 
each  province,  and  of  a  Legislative  Council,  whose  forty 
members  were  appointed  by  the  Crown ;  the  ex^utive, 
under  the  Governor,  being  ministers  who  could  hold  office 
only  so  long  as  they  were  supported  by  a  majority  of  the 
Assembly.  The  task  of  starting  this  new  machinery  of 
government  was  entrusted  to  Charles  Poulett  Thompson, 
who,  for  the  zeal,  tact,  and  good  feeling  towards  all  classes 
with  which  he  did  his  work,  was  made  Baron  Sydenham, 
but  who  died  in  the  same  year.  To  him  Sir  Charles  Metcalf 
proved  a  wise  successor;  and  of  the  ensuhig  fivc-and-twenty 
years  it  is  enough  to  say  that,  in  spite  of  the  many  obstacles 
that  had  grown  up  during  the  three-quarters  of  a  century 
before,  rapid  progress  was  made  in  the  establishment  of  peace 
and  order,  and  in  meeting  the  requirements  not  only  of  the 
large  population  then  in  the  colony,  but  of  the  rapid  in-come 
of  fresh  settlers.  The  history  of  Canada,  as  a  separate 
colony,  ends  with  the  adoption  of  Lord  Durban's  other 
suggestion,  the  uniqai  of  all  the  British  North  American 
colonies  under  one  government.  The  federation  of  Nova 
Scotia  and  New  Brunswick  with  Upper  and  Lower  Canada, 
henceforth  to  be  known  as  the  provinces  of  Ontario  and 
Quebec,  began  to  be  seriously  discussed  as  early  as  1857, 
and  it  was  sanctioned  by  the  British  Parliament  in  1867. 
In  that  year  began  a  new  and  important  stage  in  the  pro- 
gress of  British  North  America. 

Notwithstanding  its  troubles,  Canada  had,  during  the 
previous  half-century,  increased  more  rapidly  in  population 
than  any  portion  of  the  world,  except  Australia — more 
rapidly  even  than  the  United  States ;  and  the  tide  of  wealth 
was  not  very  much  behind  that  of  population.  The  com- 
parison between  the  growth  of  population  in  Canada  and 
that  in  the  United  States  is  noteworthy.  '  Boston,'  we  are 
told,  '  between  1840  and  1850,  increased  forty-five  per  cent. 
Toronto,  within  the  same  period,  increased  ninety-five  per 
cent.  New  York,  the  great  emporium  of  the  United  States, 
and  regarded  as  the  most  prosperous  city  in  the  New  World, 


ii,-   X 


ITS  PROGRESS  BEFORE  1867. 


119 


'I 
I 


increased,  in  the  same  time,  sixty -six  per  cent.,  about  thirty 
less  than  Toronto.     The  cities  of  St.  Louis  and  Cincinnati, 
which  have  also  experienced  extraordinary  prosperity,  do 
not  compare  with  Canada  any  better.     In  the  thirty  years 
preceding  1850,  the  population  of  St.  Louis  increased  fifteen 
times.     In  the  thirty-three  years  preceding  the  san;e  year, 
Toronto    increased  eighteen    times.      And   Cincinnati  in- 
creased, in  the  same  period  given  to  St.  Louis,  but  twelve 
timos.     Hamilton,  a  beautiful  Canadian  city  at  the  head 
of  Lake  Ontario,  and  founded  much  more  recently  than 
Toronto,  has  also  had  almost  unexampled  prosperity.     In 
1836  its  population  was  but  2,846  ;  in  1854  it  was  upwards 
of  20,000.     London,  still  farther  west  in  Upper  Canada, 
and  a  yet  more  recently-founded  city  than  Hamilton,  being 
surveyed  as  a  wilderness  little  more  than  twenty-five  years 
ago,  has  now  upwards  of  10,000  inhabitants.    The  city  of 
Ottawa,  recently  called  after  the  magnificent  river  of  that 
name,  and  upon  which  it  is  situated,  has  now  above  10,000 
inhabitants,  although  in  1830  it  had  but  one  hundred  and 
forty  houses,  including  mere  sheds  and  shanties ;  and  the 
property  upon  which  it  is  built  was  purchased,  not  many 
years  before,   for  £80.    The  town  of  Bradford,   situated 
between  Hamilton  and  London,  and  whose  site  was  an 
absolute  wilderness  twenty-five  years  ago,  has  now  a  popu- 
lation of  6,000,  and  has  increased,  in  ten  years,  upwards 
of  three  hundred  per  cent. ;  and  this  without  any  other 
stimulant  or  cause  save  the  business  arising  from  the  settle- 
ment of  a  fine  country  adjacent  to  it.     The  towns  of  Belle- 
ville, Cobourg,  Woodstock,  Goderich,  St.  Catherine's,  Paris, 
Stratford,  Port  Hope,  and  Dundas,  in  Upper  Canada,  show 
similar  prosperity,  some  of  them  having  increased  in  a  ratio 
even  greater  than  that  of  Toronto,  and  all  of  them  but  so 
many  evidences  of  the  improvement  of  the  country,  and  the 
growth  of   business  and  population   around   them.      That 
some  of   the  smaller   towns  in  the   United   States  have 
enjoyed  equal  prosperity  can  be  readily  believed,  from  the 
circumstance  of  a  large  population  suddenly  filling  up  the 


\ 


I  - 


II 


'I: 


i  I. 


fl: 


iji  w 

til 


i,, 


f'l 


■  ■  ■ !: 


I  -I 

!  I  i( 


I     i 


I  20 


CANADA. 


country  contiguous  to  them.  Buffalo  and  Chicago,  too, 
as  cities,  are  magnificent  and  unparalleled  examples  of  the 
business,  the  energy,  and  the  progress  of  the  United  States. 
But  that  Toronto  should  have  quietly  and  unostentatiously 
increased  in  population  in  a  greater  ratio  than  New  York, 
St.  Louis,  and  Cincinnati,  and  that  the  other  cities  and 
towns  of  Upper  Canada  should  have  kept  pace  with  the 
capital,  is  a  fact  creditable  alike  to  the  steady  industry  and 
the  noiseless  enterprise  of  the  Canadian  people.  Although 
Lower  Canada,  from  the  circumstance  of  the  tide  of  emigra- 
tion flowing  westward,  has  not  advanced  so  rapidly  as  her 
sister  province,  yet  some  of  her  counties  and  cities  have 
recently  made  great  progress.  In  the  seven  years  preceding 
1851,  the  county  of  Megantic,  on  the  south  side  of  the  St. 
Lawrence,  and  through  which  the  Quebec  and  Richmond 
railroad  passes,  increased  a  hundred  and  sixteen  per  cent. ; 
the  county  of  Ottawa,  eighty-five;  the  county  of  Drummond, 
seventy-eight ;  and  the  county  of  Sherbrook,  fifty.  The  city 
of  Montreal,  probably  the  most  substantially-built  city  in 
America,  and  certainly  one  of  the  most  beautiful,  has  trebled 
her  population  in  thirty-four  years.  The  ancient  city  of 
Quebec  has  more  than  doubled  her  population  in  the  same 
time ;  and  Sorel,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Eichelieu,  has  in- 
creased upwards  of  four  times,  showing  that  Lower  Canada, 
with  all  the  disadvantages  of  a  feudal  tenure,  and  of  being 
generally  looked  upon  as  less  desirable  for  settlement  than 
the  west,  has  quietly  but  justly  put  in  her  claim  to  a  portion 
of  the  honour  awarded  to  America  for  her  progress.'* 

*  W.  H.  Russell,  '  Canada  :  its  Defences,  Condition,  and  ResouK.is.' 


CHAPTER  X. 

THE  Hudson's  bay  territory. 

THE    Hudson's    bat    company    anp    its    territory — rivalry    in    the 

KIOHTEENTH  CENTURY — THE  CHARACTER  AND  WOUKING  OF  THE  COMPANY 
—  ITS  SERVANTS  AND  SUBJECTS — THE  RED  RIVER  SETTLEMENT — VAN- 
COUVER ISLAND  AND  BRITISH  COLUMBIA — DISSOLUTION  OF  THE  HUDSON'S 
BAY   COMPANY.      [16/0-1871.1 

HE  Dominiou  of  Canada  comprised,  when  it  was 
established  in  1867,  only  the  four  older  and 
more  advanced  settlements  of  Upper  and  Lower 
Canada,  Nova  Scotia  and  New  Brunswick,  all 
in  the  south-eastern  corner  of  British  North 
America,  and  with  an  area  of  about  388,000  square  miles. 
The  territory  added  to  it  in  the  course  of  the  next  four 
years  was — though  thin,  and  still  very  sparsely  peopled, 
and  only  beginning  to  be  civilized — eight  times  as  exten- 
sive. Our  acquisition  of  these  vast  regions  must  be  briefly 
chronicled  before  mention  is  made  of  the  recent  progress  of 
events  in  this  portion  of  our  empire. 

In  1610  Henry  Hudson,  who  had  already  made  other 
memorable  voyages  of  discovery  both  in  the  far  north  and 
aloug  the  shores  of  the  American  continent,  set  forth  on  an 
expedition  in  search  of  a  north-west  passage  to  India.  lie 
perished  in  the  quest ;  but  not  before  he  Jiad  explored 
several  coasts  and  outlets,  and  especially  the  great  sea 
called  Hudson's  Bay  in  honour  of  him,  and  Hudson's 
Straits,  which  lei\d   to  it.     Others  followed  in  his  track, 


,,<      i 


1^ 


t;' 


: 

,,j' 

\ 

i 

J                           i; 

i   rh     ■ 

!^            A 

A  ^\ 

' 

:  M-J 

-"omm 


I  'Mi 


I 


1   !    ' 

':       I  i 

!       f        .     ! 


O^ 


12: 


T//E  HUDSON'S  BA  Y  TERRITORY. 


and  in  1668  Prince  Rupert  fitted  out  an  expedition  designed 
to  start  a  settlement  in  the  bay,  and  put  to  use  the  vast 
territories  that  had  hitherto  been  only  nominally  subject 
to  the  English  Crown.  The  enterprise  succeeded ;  and  in 
1670  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company,  with  Prince  Eupert  at  its 
head,  was  formed  for  the  appropriation  of  the  region,  and 
the  development  of  commerce  in  it. 

Tliis  rcf^ion,  known  as  Prince  Rupert's  Land,  or  the 
Hudson's  Bay  Territory,  comprised,  according  to  the  word- 
ing of  the  company's  cliarter,  *  all  lands  and  territories 
upon  the  countries,  coasts,  and  confines  of  the  seas,  bays, 
lakes,  rivers,  creeks,  and  sounds,  in  whatsoever  latitude 
they  shall  be,  that  lie  within  the  entrance  of  the  straits, 
commonly  called  Hudson's  Straits,  that  are  not  already 
actually  possessed  by,  or  granted  to,  any  of  our  subjects,  or 
possessed  by  the  subjects  of  any  other  Christian  prince  or 
state.'  To  the  company  was  also  conceded  '  the  whole  and 
entire  trade  and  traffic  to  and  upon  all  havens,  bays,  creeks, 
rivers,  lakes,  and  seas,  into  w^hich  they  shall  find  entrance 
or  passage,  by  water  or  land,  out  of  the  territories,  limits, 
or  places  aforesaid,  and  to  and  with  all  the  natives  and 
people  inhabiting,  or  which  shall  inhabit,  within  the  terri- 
tories, limits  and  places  aforesaid,  and  to  and  with  all  other 
nations  inhabiting  any  of  the  coasts  adjacent  to  the  said 
territories,  limits,  and  places  which  are  not  already  pos- 
sessed as  aforesaid,  or  whereof  the  sole  liberty  and  trafiic 
is  not  granted  to  any  other  of  our  subjects.'*  That  was 
the  origin  of  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company,  which,  by  virtue 
of  its  charter,  had,  for  nearly  two  centuries,  the  ownership 
of  nearly  three  million  square  miles  of  land,  an  area  about 
half  as  largo  as  that  of  Russia,  thrice  as  large  as  that  of 
India. 

The  company  lost  no  time  in  making  use  of  its  privileges, 
though  the  extent  of  its  operations  was  strangely  dispropor- 
tionate to  the  vastness  of  its  territory.  A  settlement  was 
promptly  formed  at  Rupert  River,  near  the  southern  corner 
*  Anderson,  'History  of  Commerce,'  vol,  iii.,  p.  514. 


THE  HUDSON'S  BA  V  COMPANV. 


123 


of 


of  Hudson'a  Bay,  and  stations  and  factories  were  founded 
in  its  neighbourhood  for  carrying  on  a  trade  in  furs  with 
the  Indian  tribes  there  resident.  The  trade  was  very  suc- 
cessful, yielding  sometimes  as  much  as  fifty  per  cent,  priifit 
in  a  year ;  and  tliis  in  spite  of  the  violent  opposition  offered 
to  it  by  the  French  in  Canada,  who  claimed  the  exclusive 
possession  of  these  districts.  In  1G82  and  1G8G,  and  again 
in  1G92,  1G91,  1G9G,  and  1G97,  the  company's  forts  were 
attacked,  and  some  of  them  destroyed,  by  expeditions  from 
Quebec ;  and  in  the  latter  year,  by  tlio  Treaty  of  Ryswick, 
part  of  the  territory  was  ceded  to  the  French.  It  was 
restored  to  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company,  however,  by  the 
Treaty  of  Utrecht  in  1713,  and  after  that  no  serious  resist- 
ance was  offered  to  its  progress.  In  1730  the  company 
brought  homo  more  than  fifteen  thousand  beaver-skins,  and 
nearly  as  many  skins  of  martins,  otters,  foxes,  wolves,  and 
bears.  *  The  Hudson's  Bay  trade,' it  was  said  in  1731,  *  em- 
ploys generally  three  ships  from  London,  carrying  thither 
coarse  duffle  cloth  or  blanketing,  powder  and  shot,  spirits, 
etc. ;  and,  in  return,  brings  home  vast  quantities  of  peltry 
of  many  kinds,  bed-feathers,  whale-fins,  etc.  And  as  that 
small  company  makes  a  large  dividend  of  eight,  or  formerly 
ten,  per  cent,  on  their  capital  of  £100,000,  besides  the  em- 
ployment it  gives  to  our  people  in  fitting  out  and  loading 
those  ships,  it  may  truly  be  said  to  be  an  advantageous 
commerce.'* 

Yet,  more  than  a  hundred  years  ago,  it  was  urged  in 
Parliament  that  this  commerce  ought  to  be  more  advanta- 
geous. '  The  Company's  four  factories,'  it  was  said  in  1749 
by  one  of  the  agents,  '  contain  only  one  hundred  and  thirty 
servants,  and  two  small  houses  with  only  eight  men  in  each. 
There  are  iucontestiblo  evidences  of  rich  copper  and  lead 
mines  ;  yet  the  company  give  no  encouragement  for  work- 
ing them,  nor  for  their  servants  going  into  the  inland 
countries.  If  the  least  evidence  had  been  suffered  to 
transpire  that  the  climate  is  very  habitable,  the  soil  rich  and 
*  Anderson,  vol.  iii.,  pp.  167,  233. 


0 


t  ■  '• 


•i  ■' 


.  ,1 


f  ^ 


124 


THE  HUDSON'S  BAY  TERRITORY. 


fruitful,  fit  both  for  corn  and  for  cattle,  rich  in  mines,  and 
the  fisheries  capable  of  great  improvements,  the  legislature 
would  have  taken  the  right  into  its  own  hands,  and  would 
have  settled  the  country,  and  laid  the  trade  open  for  the 
benefit  of  Britain.  The  company,  therefore,  have  con- 
tented theinselves  with  dividing  a  large  profit  upon  a  small 
capital  amongst  only  about  one  hundred  persons,  and  have 
not  only  endeavoured  to  keep  the  true  state  of  the  trade  and 
country  an  impenetrable  secret,  but  have  also  industriously 
propagated  the  worst  impressions  of  them.'"''  Parliament, 
however,  decided  that  the  rights  of  the  Hudson's  Bay  Com- 
pany were  indisputable,  and  tliat  it  must  be  allowed  to 
carry  on  its  trade  as  it  judged  best  for  its  own  interests. 

But  its  exclusive  privileges  were  again,  and  this  time 
successfully,  disputed  about  fifty  years  afterwards.  A 
North- West  Company  was*  founded  with  powers  to  carry  on 
its  trade  in  the  unused  portions  of  the  Hudson's  Bay  Com- 
pany's Territory.  The  Quebec  Fur  Company,  moreover, 
established  even  before  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company,  and 
which  had  long  confined  its  operations  to  commerce  with 
the  Indians  bordering  upon  Canada,  now  became  more 
active.  The  rivalship  of  the  three  companies  led  to  a  great 
extension  of  our  acquaintance  with  tho  distant  parts  of 
North  America,  and  intercourse  with  its  natives.  The  trade 
in  furs,  that  had  hitherto  been  chiefly  limited  to  the  regions 
about  Hudson's  Bay,  was  pursued  in  the  far  west.  Ex- 
ploring parties  were  formed,  and  by  them  fertilizing  rivers 
and  fruitful  plains  were  discovered  in  quarters  never  before 
visited ;  and  in  some  of  these  districts  valuable  factories 
and  strong  forts  were  built.  Although  the  feuds  of  the 
rival  companies,  sometimes  issuing  even  in  bloodshed, 
greatly  lessened  their  profits,  they  caused  a  vast  increase 
of  their  operations.  The  feuds  died  out,  but  not  the  enter- 
prise, with  the  fusion  of  the  North- West  Company  in  the 
Hudson's  Bay  Company  in  1821 ;   and  by  that  time  the 


Anderson,  vol.  iii.,  p.  271. 


A     ' 


THE  COMPANV'S  FACTORIES. 


125 


general  cliaractcr  of  the  immense   territory  was  tolerably 
well  lUKlerstood  and,  to  some  extent,  rightly  valued. 

In  1817  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company,  ^vitll  a  capital  of 
£400,000  in  the  hands  of  two  hundred  and  thirty-nine  pro- 
prietors, had  a  hundred  and  thirty-six  separate  establish- 
ments, extending  east  and  west  from  Labrador  and  tho 
Atlantic  Ocean  to  British  Columbia  and  the  racilic  Ocean  ; 
and  north  and  south  from  the  boundaries  of  Canada  and 
the  United  States  up  to  Ballin's  Bay  and  the  Arctic  Ocean. 
Its  factors,  clerks,  and  servants,  stationed  at  these  settle- 
ments, then  numbered  about  fourteen  hundred,  and  their 
business  was  to  trade  with  the  Indian  population,  scattered 
over  the  vast  area,  which  was  supposed  to  amount  to  about 
ninety  thousand.  '  The  trade  in  America,'  said  an  impartial 
and  well-informed  citizen  of  the  United  States,  in  1844,  *  is 
especially  directed  by  a  resident  governor,  who  occasionally 
visits  and  inspects  all  the  principal  forts.  Under  hini,  c-s 
officers,  are  chief  factors,  chief  traders,  and  clerks,  for  the 
most  part  natives  of  North  Britain,  and  an  army  of  regular 
servants,  employed  as  hunters,  traders,  and  voyageurs, 
nearly  all  of  them  Canadians  or  half-breeds.  The  number 
of  all  these  persons  is  small  when  compared  with  the  duties 
they  have  to  perform  ;  but  the  manner  in  which  they  are 
admitted  into  the  service,  and  the  training  to  which  they 
are  subjected,  are  such  as  to  render  their  efficiency  and 
their  devotion  to  the  general  interests  as  great  as  possible. 
The  strictest  discipline,  regularity,  and  economy  are  en- 
forced in  every  part  of  the  company's  territories ;  and  the 
magistrates  appointed  under  the  Act  of  Parliament  for  the 
preservation  of  tranquillity  are  seldom  called  on  to  exercise 
their  functions,  except  in  ^^^e  settlement  of  trifling  disputes. 
In  the  treatment  of  the  aborigines  of  the  countries  under 
its  control  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company  appears  to  have 
admirably  reconciled  policy  with  humanity.  The  prohibition 
to  supply  these  people  with  ardent  spirits  appears  to  be 
rigidly  enforced.  Schools  for  the  instruction  of  the  native 
children  are  established  at  all  the  principal  trading  forts, 


,  I 


4' 


'M\ 


!■   I 


■t    ■• 


I  I 


'f 


126 


THE  HUDSON'S  r,AV  TERRITORY. 


each  of  wliicli  also  contains  a  liospital  foi*  sick  Indians, 
and  offui'S  employment  for  those  who  are  disposed  to  work 
whilst  hunting  cannot  be  carried  on.  Missionar  js  of 
various  sects  are  encouraged  to  endeavour  to  convert  them 
to  Ciu'istianity,  and  to  induce  them  to  adopt  the  usages  of 
civilized  life,  so  far  as  may  bo  consistent  with  the  nature  of 
the  labours  required  for  their  support ;  and  attempts  are 
made,  at  great  expense,  to  collect  the  Indians  in  villages,  on 
tracts  where  the  climate  and  soil  are  most  favourable  for 
agriculture.  It  is,  however,  to  be  observed  that,  of  tlie 
whole  territory,  only  a  few  small  portions  are  capable  of 
being  rendered  productive  by  agriculture.  From  the  re- 
mainder nothing  of  value  can  be  obtained  excepting  furs, 
and  those  articles  can  be  procured  in  greater  quantities  and 
at  less  cost  than  by  any  other  means.'*  But  the  '  few- 
small  portions  '  of  tlie  great  Hudson's  Bay  Territory  com- 
prise districts  almost  as  large  as  England,  while  others 
have  been  proved  to  be  rich  iu  other  sorts  of  wealth,  till 
lately  never  dreamt  of. 

The  stations  of  the  company,  most  plentiful  about 
Hudson's  Bay,  but  also  distributed  over  the  country  stretch- 
ing westward  for  more  than  two  thousand  miles,  served  as 
small  centres  of  civilization  in  the  midst  of  wide  areas  of 
forest  desolation.  *  They  are  built  usually,'  said  a  traveller 
famihar  with  them,  '  in  the  form  of  a  square,  or  nearly  so, 
of  about  a  hundred  yards.  This  space  is  picketed  iu  with 
logs  of  timber,  driven  into  the  ground,  and  rising  fifteen  or 
twenty  feet  above  it.  In  two  of  the  corners  is  usually 
reared  a  wooden  bastion,  sufficiently  high  to  enable  the 
garrison  to  see  a  considerable  distance  over  the  country. 
In  the  gallery  of  the  bastion  five  or  six  small  guns,  6  or  12 
pounders,  are  mounted,  covered  in  and  used  with  regular 
ports,  like  those  of  a  ship,  while  the  ground-floor  serves  for 
the  magazine.  Inside  the  pickets  are  six  or  eight  houses  ; 
one  containing  the  mess-room  for  the  officers  of  the  fort. 


:l 

% 

y .' 

*  Greenhow,  •  History  of  Oregon  and  California.' 


IG 


77//:  CO.UPAA'V'S  FACTO Rli:S. 


1:7 


and  their  dwollin^-liouso  when  the  number  of  them  is 
small ;  two  or  three  others — the  number  of  course  depend- 
ing on  the  strength  of  the  fort,  whicli  seldom  exceeds  a 
dozen  men — being  devoted  to  the  trappers,  voyageurs,  etc. 
Another  serves  for  tlio  Indian  trading  store,  and  one  for  the 
furs,  which  remain  in  store  at  the  inland  forts  during  tho 
greater  part  of  the  year.'* 

Near  each  station  one  or  two  Indian  villages  were 
generally  to  bo  found.  Other  villages  were  far  f^/.vay  from 
English  settlements.  Of  the  aborigines,  when  they  had 
not  been  maddened  by  the  strong  drink  which  white  men 
taught  them  to  love,  most  visitors  spoke  well.  '  Tho  Indian,' 
wo  are  told  by  two  who,  in  18G2  and  18G3,  travelled  all 
across  the  Hudson's  Bay  Territory,  *  is  constantly  engaged 
in  hunting  to  supply  his  family  with  food ;  and  when  that 
is  scarce  he  will  set  out  without  any  provision  for  iiiinself, 
and  often  travel  from  morning  to  night  for  days  before  he 
finds  the  game  he  seeks.  Then,  loaded  with  meat,  ho  toils 
home  again,  and,  whilst  the  plenty  lasts,  considers  himself 
entitled  to  complete  rest  after  his  exertions.  This  self- 
denial  of  the  men,  and  their  wonderful  endurance  of  hunger, 
is  illustrated  by  the  case  of  one  hunter  who,  several  years 
ago,  narrowly  escaped  death  by  starvation.  That  winter 
buffalo  did  not  come  up  to  tho  woods,  and  moose  and  lish 
were  very  scarce.  After  killing  his  horses,  one  after  another, 
when  driven  to  the  last  extremity,  the  family  found  them- 
selves at  length  without  resource.  The  hunter,  leaving 
with  his  wife  and  son  a  scanty  remnant  of  dried  horseflesh, 
hunted  for  two  days  without  success,  and  at  last,  faint  and 
still  fasting,  with  difficulty  dragged  himself  home.  All  now 
made  up  their  minds  to  die ;  for  tho  hunter  became  unable 
to  move,  and  his  wife  and  boy  too  helpless  to  procure  food. 
After  being  eight  days  longer  without  tasting  food,  and 
exposed  to  the  fierce  cold  of  winter,  they  were  fortu- 
nately discovered  by  some  of  the  company's  voyageurs,  by 

*  Mayne,  'Four  Years  in  British  Columbia  and  Vancouver  Island,' 
p.  117. 


' 


^^1, 


■  \' 


i   ,! 
\    i 


I2S 


THE  HUDSON'S  BAY  TERRITORY. 


whose  careful  attention  they  were  with  difficulty  brought 
round.'* 

DilTorent  from  the  other  stations  of  the  Hudson's  Bay 
('oinpany  was  the  Eed  Eiver  Settlement,  begun  in  1813, 
with  Fort  Garry  for  its  capital.  Here,  within  easy  reach  of 
Canada  and  the  United  States,  its  first  experiment  of 
colonization  was  made,  and  with  considerable  success.  An 
agricultural  population  of  five  thousand,  composed  chiefly 
of  civilized  Indians  or  half-breeds,  with  a  mixture  of  Cana- 
dians, Englishmen,  and  colonists  from  the  continent  of 
Europe,  occupied  the  district  in  1843  ;  and  from  that  time 
it  made  rapid  progress,  notwithstanding  the  frequent 
quarrels  that  arose  between  the  law^less  natives  outside, 
and  their  more  or  less  Anglicized  kinsmen  and  their  white 
masters  inside  the  grovving  settlement.  It  was  the  starting- 
point  for  the  westward  and  northwestward  movements,  by 
which  Manitoba,  Saskatchewan,  and  other  districts  have 
been  taken  possession  of  by  English  emigrants. 

Two  other  and  more  important  settlements,  the  colonies 
of  British  Columbia  and  Vancouver  Island,  have  grown  up 
on  tJie  most  western  limits  of  the  Hudson's  Bay  Territory. 

Some  part  of  the  country  now  know^n  as  British  Columbia 
had  been  visited  by  Sir  Francis  Drake  in  the  course  of  his 
famous  voyage  round  the  w^orld  ;  and  many  later  adventurers 
had  visited  its  Pacific  coast-line  and  the  neighbouring  islands 
during  the  two  following  centuries.  But  the  formidable 
barrier  of  the  Eocky  Mountains  deterred  the  Hudson's  Bay 
Company  from  making  use  of  this  portion  of  its  territory 
until  recent  times.  In  1804  it  established  a  fur-trading 
station  at  Fort  George,  on  Fraser  Eiver,  in  New  Caledonia, 
and  soon  other  factories  were  opened  in  the  neighbouxhood. 
These  proving  successful,  it  extended  its  operations  and 
erected  a  trading  fort  near  the  site  of  Victoria,  in  Vancouver 
Island,  in  1843,  and  the  great  natural  resources  of  the  island 
Boon  suggested  more  extensive  colonizing  work.     In  1847  it 

*  ViBcount  Milton  and  Dr.   Cheadle,   'The  North-West    Passage  by 
Land.' 


If 


lay 
)ry 


(r 


Ilia, 

)a. 

[nd 

Ind 

it 

by 


ITS  SETTLEMENTS  AND  OFFSHOOTS. 


129 


asked  permission  of  the  British  Government  to  pursue  this 
work  in  an  orderly  way.  The  permission  was  given,  and  in 
1848  Vancouver  Island  was  assigned  to  the  Hudson's  Bay 
Company  for  ten  years.  The  discovery  of  the  Californian 
gold-fields  brought  many  settlers  to  this  quarter  of  the 
world,  and  some  of  them,  preferring  the  quiet  of  agricultural 
life  to  the  turmoil  of  the  district  of  gold-mines,  went  north- 
ward to  Vancouver  Island  and  British  Columbia.  Thus 
their  colonization  was  begun,  soon  to  be  rapidly  augmented. 
In  1857  British  Columbia  was  also  found  to  be  rich  in  gold, 
and  immediately  a  fresh  tide  of  immigration  set  in.  Victoria, 
hitherto  a  quiet  village,  became  suddenly  a  busy  port, 
through  v/hich,  in  the  course  of  four  months,  twenty 
thousand  adventurers  passed  on  their  way  to  the  new  El 
Dorado.  In  1859  both  the  island  and  the  mainland  were  taken 
out  of  the  hands  of  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company,  which  was 
in  no  way  adapted  for  the  control  of  settlements  promising 
to  become  so  populous,  and  the  separate  colonies  of  British 
Columbia  and  Vancouver  Island  were  formed.  In  18G6 
they  were  united  under  one  administration,  designed  to 
meet  the  requirements  of  the  new  England  growing  up  on 
the  northern  shores  of  the  Pacific. 

The  surrender  of  these  young  colonies  by  the  Hudson's 
Bay  Company  was  only  the  prelude  to  its  entire  dissolution. 
Started  when  monopolies  were  common,  if  not  necessary  for 
the  development  of  British  commerce  and  civilization — the 
greatest  and  most  fruitful  monopoly  of  all  being  the  East 
India  Company — it  outlived  all  other  institutions  of  its  kind. 
It  did  its  work  as  worthily  and  honestly  as  could  be  expected 
of  it.  But  the  same  causes  which  led  to  the  blending  of 
the  various  British  North  American  colonies  in  the  Canadian 
Confederation  rendered  inexpedient  the  longer  existence  of 
the  Hudson's  Bay  Company.  In  1868  an  Act  was  passed  by 
the  British  Parliament  authorizing  the  transfer  of  all  the 
vast  territories,  vaguely  described  in  Charles  the  Second's 
days  as  Prince  Rupert's  Land,  to  the  Dominion  of  Canada ; 
and  this  was  effected  in  1869,  when  the  successors  of  the 

9 


N 


if 
i ' 

i  J 


I-U^^ 


130 


THE  HUDSON'S  BA  Y  COMPANY. 


\  u. 


-\ 


^ 


ill 


old  proprietors  received  ample  compensation  for  the  lapsing 
of  their  'vested  rights.'  The  southern  portion  of  the  great 
North- West  Territory  was  mapped  out,  and  divided  into  the 
four  huge  subordinate  provinces  of  Saskatchewan,  Assiniboia, 
Alberta,  and  Athabasca,  and  provided  in  1882  with  suitable 
machinery  of  government.  Before  that  time,  in  1870, 
Manitoba  had  been  organized  as  a  separate  province  of  the 
Dominion,  and  in  1871  British  Columbia,  including  Van- 
couver Islands,  had  joined  the  Confederation. 


I  li 


I   :i 


;i  H 


i.   < 


n 


i 


I; 


1 


CHAPTER  XI. 

BRITISH   NORTH   AMERICA. 

THE  DOMINION  OP  CANADA — ITS  CONSTITUTION — A  GENKRAL  VIEW  OF  THE 
BRITISH  NORTH  AMKRICAN  COLONIES — PRINCE  EDWARD  ISLAND — CAPE 
BRETON — NOVA  SCOTIA — NEW  BRUNSWICK — QUEBEC — ONTARIO — MANITOBA 
— THE  NORTH-WESTERN  TERRITORIES — BRITISH  COLUMBIA  AND  VANCOUVER 
ISLANP.      [1867-1888.J 

HE  constitution  provided  in  1867  for  the  four 
colonies  which  were  then  united  as  the  Dominion 
of  Canada,  and  so  prepared  as  to  leave  room  for 
the  inclusion  in  it  of  all  our  other  settlements  in 
Nvorth  America,  was  a  wise  and  most  serviceable 
piece  of  statesmanship — a  somewhat  tardy  enforcement  of 
nearly  all  that  was  best  in  the  scheme  put  forward  by  the 
Earl  of  Durham  in  1838 ;  but  perhaps  all  the  wiser  and 
more  serviceable  for  the  delay  which  had  enabled  that 
scheme  to  be  improved  upon  by  the  teachings  of  experience, 
and  to  be  fitted  to  the  growing  needs  of  the  colonists.  Great 
improvements  had  been  already  and  more  promptly  made, 
in  accordance  with  Lord  Durham's  suggestions,  on  the 
arrangements  that  he  found  and  condemned  in  the  small 
and  turbulent  Canada  of  his  day  ;  and  those  improvements 
had  been  working  beneficially  during  a  quarter  of  a  century, 
concurrently  with  the  progress  made  in  the  neighbouring 
colonies,  before  the  great  change  was  effected  in  1867. 

The  main  purpose  of  this  memorable  reform  was  to  secure 
for  our  North  American  colonies,  under  the  supremacy  of 

9—2 


ii:     ) 


Ml 


132 


BRITISH  NORTH  AMERICA. 


i 


I 


r 


the  Crown,  a  system  of  government  '  similar  in  principle  to 
that  of  the  United  Kingdom.'  The  result  was  a  system  of 
government  more  truly  representative  than  at  that  time,  or 
afterwards,  existed  in  the  United  Kingdom — one  that  was 
almost  Kepublican  in  everything  but  the  name.  Had  the 
same  policy  been  pursued  ninety  or  a  hundred  years  earlier 
towards  the  older  English  colonies  which  had  been  planted 
south  of  the  St.  Lawrence,  it  is  fair  to  assume  that  there 
would  have  been  no  American  War  of  Independence  and  no 
United  States  of  America,  completely  independent  of  British 
rule,  and  in  some  respects  antagonistic  to  it.  Had  a  less 
generous  or  prudent  policy  been  pursued,  it  may  also  bo 
assumed  that  some,  if  not  all,  of  our  North  American  colonies 
would  ere  now  have  severed  their  connection  with  the 
mother  country,  and  would  have  established  themselves  as 
rivals  or  allies  of  the  great  Southern  Eepublic.  The  timely 
concessions  made  to  the  North  American  colonies,  more- 
over, as  we  shall  see,  furnished  a  precedent  that  has  been 
followed,  wfth  variations,  in  the  treatment  of  our  younger 
groups  of  colonies  in  Australasia  and  South  Africa. 

By  the  Dominion  constitution  of  1867  a  legislature  was 
framed,  with  Ottawa  as  its  convenient  seat,  consisting  of  a 
Senate,  the  members  of  which  are  appointed  by  the  Crown 
for  life,  and  which  thus  corresponds  in  a  modified  form  to 
the  British  House  of  Lords,  and  of  a  House  of  Commons 
elected  by  the  people,  to  which  the  ministers,  though  form- 
ally holding  office  under  the  Governor-General  as  repre- 
sentative of  the  sovereign,  are  responsible.  The  members 
of  the  Senate,  limited  in  number  to  seventy-eight,  with  pro- 
vision for  four  more  in  the  event  of  Newfoundland,  now  the 
only  outside  colony,  being  added  to  the  Confederation,  are 
selected  from  residents  in  the  several  provinces  in  some- 
thing like  proportion  to  their  population.  To  the  House  of 
Commons  representatives  are  elected  under  a  manhood 
suffrage  by  one-membered  constituencies ;  the  total  of  215 
being  made  up  by  92  from  Ontario,  65  from  Quebec,  21  from 
Nova  Scotia,  16  from  New  Brunswick,  6  from  Prince  Edward 


I   ' 


;   i,  ,i  (iji 


/as 


to 

nis 

I'ln- 

)re- 

^ers 

)ro- 

Ithe 
are 
liie- 
oi 
lood 
I215 
L'om 
?ard 


THE  DOMINION  OF  CANADA. 


133 


Island,  5  from  Manitoba,  4  from  the  North-West  Territories, 
and  6  from  British  Colmnbia.  By  this  Dominion  Parliament, 
and  the  Government  approved  by  it,  all  matters  of  general 
legislation  are  dealt  with.  For  the  management  of  local 
aifairs,  each  province  has  a  legislature  and  executive  of 
its  own,  their  decisions  being  subject  to  the  veto  of  the 
Dominion  Parliament  in  Ottawa,  just  as  those  of  the  latter 
are  subject  to  the  veto  of  the  Imperial  Parliament  in  London ; 
and  subordinate  to  these  provincial  assemblies  are  municipal 
councils  for  the  management  of  strictly  local  affairs.  The 
administration  of  justice  u,nd  all  matters  pertinent  to  the 
military  and  naval  defence  of  the  Dominion  are,  as  in 
England,  under  the  control  of  the  Crown,  though  subject 
to  the  financial  Dower  of  the  House  of  Commons. 

Under  the  Constitution  of  1867  the  Dominion  of  Canada 
is  thus  virtually  endowed  with  independence,  the  Governors - 
General  placed  over  it  by  the  Crown  being  suitable  centres 
or  pivots  of  the  administratwe  machinery,  but  being  ex- 
pected to  conform  to  the  ideal  of  constitutional  monarchy 
by  reigning  without  governing.  The  arrangement,  how- 
ever, has  worked  well.  During  twenty  years  there  has 
been  very  little  friction  either  between  the  mother  country 
and  her  great  dependency  or  between  the  portions  of  that 
dependency.  On  the  contrary,  old  feuds  have  in  large 
measure  subsided.  If  English  trade  has  suffered  through 
the  many  restrictions  put  upon  it  by  the  Canadian  Protec- 
tionists, it  has  suffered  not  more,  and  perhaps  less,  than  it 
would  have  suffered  had  the  Dominion  been  entirely  sepa- 
rated from  England ;  and  this  has  been  one  of  the  chief 
grounds  of  quarrel  which  have  arisen.  English  trade  and 
English  credit,  moreover,  have  profited  much  by  the  vast 
increase  of  Canadian  prosperity  that  has  taken  place  since 
1867. 

The  most  striking  evidence  of  this  prosperity,  at  once  an 
effect  and  a  cause,  is  in  the  construction  of  the  great 
Canadian  Pacific  Eailway.  By  1875,  about  4,800  miles  of 
railway,  running  in  various  directions,  had  been  constructed 


<• 


V 


1 '  j 

,  i 

\        Ml' 

i 

»34 


/BRITISH  NORTH  AMERICA. 


U 


ii 


throughout  the  Dominion ;  and  the  mileage  had  been  exactly 
doubled  by  1884,  before  the  Canadian  Pacific  Railway  was 
completed.  Thfe  wonderful  exploit  of  engineering  stretclies 
for  more  than  3,000  miles,  through  huge  mountains  and 
over  broad  rivers,  from  Quebec  to  Vancouver  in  British 
Columbia,  and  thus  opens  up  a  new  route  for  commerce 
between  Europe  and  Asia  by  spanning  the  land  between 
the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  Oceans,  besides  facilitating  the 
conveyance  from  place  to  place  of  the  produce  of  the  inter- 
mediate provinces.  By  its  means,  and  by  the  other  road- 
ways in  connection  with  it,  is  bridged  over  the  immense 
tract  of  land  separating  the  older  of  our  North  American 
colonies  which  are  grouped  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  conti- 
nent, from  their  younger  sisters  in  the  distant  West,  and  a 
closer  bond  than  politicians  can  fashion  has  been  established 
between  the  aggregation  of  English  possessions — some  of 
them  yet  in  their  infancy,  and  some  as  yet  almost  quite  un- 
used— which  occupy  an  area  of  three  and  a  half  million 
square  miles,  and  afford  room  for  a  population  more  than  ten 
times  as  numerous  as  the  five  millions  who  now  inhajbit  it. 

Of  the  several  portions  of  this  vast  territory,  united  by 
community  of  interests,  and,  amid  many  and  important 
differences,  by  physical  resemblances,  a  comprehensive 
view  may  here  be  taken . 

British  North  America  begins  with  the  mainland  and 
islands  that  lie  on  either  side  of  the  Gulf  and  River  of  St. 
Lawrence.  On  the  northern  side  are  Newfoundland, 
which,  as  a  great  fishing-station  and  not  much  else,  stands 
apart ;  and  Labrador,  still  almost  unexplored,  but  of  too 
barren  an  appearance  to  promise  much  benefit  from  its  use, 
save  as  a  haunt  for  fishermen  on  the  coast,  and  a  resort  of 
fur-traders  in  the  interior.  On  the  southern  side  is  the  fair 
Acadian  land  of  the  old  French  settlers,  including  Cape 
Breton  and  Prince  Edward  Island,  Nova  Scotia,  and  New 
Brunswick. 

Prince  Edward  Island,  which  had  in  1881  a  population 
of  about  109,000  spread  over  an  area  of  2,133  square  miles. 


I  ( 


'i  ■  •II 


ITS  MARITIME  PROVINCES. 


135 


id 


ds 
loo 


of 

lir 

[pe 


[on 
les, 


about  the  size  of  tlio  English  county  of  Norfolk,  lies 
pleasantly  in  the  bay  that  skirts  New  Brunswick  and  Nova 
Scotia.  A  narrow  and  irregular  strip  of  land,  it  contains 
numberless  small  bays,  abounding  in  lish,  and  otfonng  con- 
venient harbourage  for  far  more  shipping  than  frequents  its 
shores.  The  dense  forests  with  which  it  once  abounded 
have  been  partly  destroyed  by  fires,  and  other  parts  have 
been  cleared  to  make  room  for  the  pastoral  and  agricultural 
pursuits  which  the  island  especially  invites.  The  forests 
that  remain  furnish  material  for  the  ship-building  that  has 
long  been  a  favourite  and  lucrative  pursuit  of  the  inhabi- 
tants. '  In  few  places,'  it  was  said  in  1849,  *  have  there 
been  greater  changes  of  fortune.  A  person  who  came  from 
England  in  the  capacity  of  a  cook  was  employed  in  a  ship- 
yard, and  recently  his  former  master  was  among  the  number 
of  his  servants.  He  now  owns  extensive  tracts  of  land  and 
farms,  mills  of  different  kinds,  and  a  great  variety  of  other 
property.  During  the  past  year  he  has  built  no  less  than 
ten  ships,  and  loaded  them  with  timber  for  Great  Britain. 
He  is  a  man  of  influence,  and  has  several  times  been  elected 
a  member  of  the  House  of  Assembly.  There  are  not  thirty 
words  in  his  vocabulary,  yet  all  his  sayings  and  doings  are 
characterized  by  sound  sense  and  correct  judgment. '■''■  By 
such  rough  and  honest  enterprise  on  the  part  of  its  principal 
inhabitants,  Prince  Edward  Island  has  continued  to 
prosper. 

Cape  Breton,  an  island  about  half  as  large  as  Yorkshire, 
separated  from  Nova  Scotia  by  a  narrow  channel  which  is 
in  one  part  only  a  mile  wide,  and  nearly  divided  into  two 
islands  by  an  inlet,  which  at  its  end  leaves  only  a  few  miles 
of  land,  lies  to  the  east  of  Prince  Edward  Island.  Its 
northern  and  larger  half  is  wild  and  mountainous.  The 
southern  part  is  an  undulating  plain,  crowded  with  bays 
and  streams,  and  terminating  in  high  cliffs  which  form  a 
rocky  barrier  to  the  Atlantic  Ocean  on  the  south-eastern 
shore.    In  it  are  most  of  the  34,000  dwellers  in  the  island. 

*  Martin,  vol.  i.,  p.  240. 


I  I. 


1\ 


IfM 


136 


BRITISH  NORTH  AMERICA. 


i* 

i; 

I 


( 


I  1 


!;  ■  I  i 


i  f 


Sydney,  the  capital,  is  beautifully  situated  at  the  head  of  a 
bay  that  forms  a  safe  harbour  for  the  ships  which  frequent 
it,  and  which  will  be  much  more  numerous  when  proper 
use  is  made  of  the  resources  of  the  island.  Noble  forests 
offer  an  unlimited  supply  of  timber,  which,  with  agricultural 
productions,  long  formed  the  staple  exports  of  Cape  Breton. 
In  later  times  profit  has  also  been  derived  from  the  coal- 
mines that  have  been  opened  at  a  convenient  distance  from 
the  capital,  both  being  connected  with  the  vast  bed  that 
passes  under  the  sea  to  the  north-eastward  and  reappears  in 
Newfoundland.  Immense  deposits  of  gypsum,  and  numerous 
salt-springs,  also  occur  among  the  red  sandstone  rock  of 
which  a  great  part  of  the  island  is  composed. 

Eed  sandstone  and  coal  also  abound,  as  well  as  granite, 
in  the  adjoining  mainland  of  Nova  Scotia  and  New  Bruns- 
wick. Nova  Scotia,  more  than  twice  as  large  as  Wales, 
having  an  area  of  15,617  square  miles,  is  an  oblong,  about 
200  miles  long  and  some  50  broad,  connected  with  New 
Brunswick  by  a  narrow  isthmus.  Its  undulating  surface, 
marked  by  no  high  hills,  is  varied  by  bays  and  creeks  along 
the  shore,  and  inland  by  numerous  lakes  and  several  rivers. 
The  chosen  home  of  the  French  Acadians,  its  population 
has  to  this  day  maintained  much  of  the  character  of  those 
first  settlers  and  their  offspring.  Agricultural  and  pastoral 
employments  inland,  and  fishing  on  the  coast,  render  life 
too  easy  for  the  other  resources  of  the  country  to  be  quicklj 
developed,  and  still  about  a  third  of  its  inhabitants, 
numbering  440,000  in  1881,  are  so  employed.  Other  ways 
of  wealth,  however,  have  lately  been  opened  up.  The  ash, 
beech,  birch,  maple,  oak,  pine,  and  spruce,  that  throng  its 
forests,  have  not  only  helped  to  stock  the  timber  market  of 
Europe,  but  have  been  extensively  employed  in  ship-building 
in  the  colony  itself,  and  especially  in  the  fine  harbour  of 
Halifax,  chosen  by  Great  Britain  as  its  chief  navaV  "station 
in  North  America.  The  discovery  of  coal  and  iron  has  also 
led  both  to  a  quickened  foreign  trade,  and  to  the  establish- 
ment of  many  local  manufactories,  and  a  further  stimulus 


f 


A'OVA  SCOT/A  AND  NEW  BRUNSWICK 


137 


Its 

lof 

g 
)f 

l)n 

30 


has  appeared  in  the  finding  of  gold  in  the  colony.  This 
new  attraction,  if  over-estimated  in  itself,  is  beneficial  in  its 
encouragement  of  colonization  and  enterprise  of  other 
sorts.  '  Prior  to  1824,'  said  one  of  its  Governors,  Sir  John 
Harvey,  in  1847,  *  the  foreign  trade  of  Nova  Scgtia  was 
very  limited,  but  the  changes  in  the  commercial  policy  of 
the  empire  opened  a  wider  field  for  enterprise,  of  which  the 
North  Americans  were  not  slow  to  avail  themselves.  Nova 
Scotia  vessels,  besides  their  traffic  with  the  neighbouring 
States  and  the  West  Indies,  now  trade  to  the  Baltic,  the 
Mediterranean,  China,  the  Mauritius,  the  East  Indies,  the 
Brazils,  and  Havannah,  and  our  merchants  and  mariners 
are  fast  acquiring  an  accurate  acquaintance  with  distant 
seas,  and  in  every  part  of  the  world.'*  But  the  trade  of 
Nova  Scotia  was  nearly  trebled  in  the  ensuing  forty 
years. 

New  Brunswick,  an  almost  square  block  of  land  between 
Nova  Scotia  and  Canada,  containing  27,322  square  miles, 
and  nearly  as  large  as  Scotland,  has  not  improved  so 
rapidly.  Its  population,  which  was  156,000  in  1840,  was 
only  252,000  in  1861,  and  321,000  in  1881.  Its  magnificent 
stores  of  coal,  iron,  copper,  and  other  minerals  are  still 
but  little  used,  and  its  chief  trade  is  in  the  timber  that 
abounds  in  its  vast  and  rarely  traversed  forests.  Its  least 
used  and  most  beautiful  districts  are  in  the  north-west, 
watered  by  the  Restigouche  and  its  tributaries.  '  Wherever 
the  e '■0  wanders,  nothing  is  to  be  seen  but  an  almost  incal- 
culable numbor  of  lofty  hills,  interspersed  with  lakes,  rivers, 
and  waterfalls,  glens  and  valleys.  Some  of  the  mountains 
are  clothed  with  the  tall  and  beautiful  pine.  Others  sustain 
a  fine  growth  of  hard  wood.  Many  have  swampy  summits, 
and  several  terminate  in  rich  meadows  and  plains.  Some- 
times the  precipitous  banks  of  the  Restigouche  are  three 
hundred  feet  above  its  bed ;  and  at  every  bend,  which  is 
about  once  in  six  miles,  the  voyager  is  deceived  with  the 
appearance  of  entering  a  well-sheltered  lake.  But,  at  about 
*  Nova  Scotia  Blue-Book,  1847. 


'-^     1: 


%w. 


S'  i.i 


M 


.1 7: 


FjS 


BRITISH  NORTH  AMERICA. 


Nil 


I ' 


1  I 


P  I: 
I 


ii 


: 

Ii  • 

%  f 

'i  ^  1 

i 

y  i 

seventy  miles  from  tlic  sea,  the  country  becomes  compara- 
tively level,  and  all  the  way  to  the  head  of  the  river  is  a 
fine,  bold,  open  territory,  consisting  of  a  rich  upland,  skirted 
with  large  tracts  of  intervale,  and  covered  with  a  dense 
growth  of  mixed  wood,  in  which  large  groves  of  pine  are 
very  conspicuous.'* 

Of  the  same  wild  character  is  the  strip  of  Canadian  land 
that  lies  between  New  Brunswick  and  the  southern  bank  of 
the  St.  Lawrence  ;  wliile  so  much  of  the  northern  shore  as 
is  included  in  Canada  shares  to  some  extent  the  bleak  and 
rugged  aspect  of  Labrador.  Neither  of  these  sections  of 
Lower  Canada,  or  the  province  of  Quebec,  as  it  is  now 
called,  has  yet  been  put  to  much  use,  though  some  of  the 
forts  set  up  long  ago  by  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company  have 
grown  into  towns  or  villages  along  the  banks  of  the  river, 
here  a  noble  estuary,  from  thirty  to  forty  miles  wide. 

Busy  Canada  begins  about  a  hundred  miles  east  of  Quebec. 
Thence  along  the  banks  of  the  mighty  river,  on  either  side, 
there  appears  an  almost  continuous  line  of  villages  and  towns 
extending  to  Lake  Ontario,  the  southern  bank,  soon  after 
Montreal  is  passed,  being  part  of  the  United  States.  *  The 
country  below  and  above  Quebec,  for  some  distance,*  it  was 
said  in  1849,  before  some  other  portions  of  the  Canadian 
dominion  had  been  explored,  *  presents  scenery  whose 
beauty  is  unequalled  in  America,  and  probably  in  the  world. 
From  the  eminence  over  which  the  post-road  passes,  or  in 
sailing  up  the  St.  Lawrence,  there  are  frequent  prospects  of 
immense  extent  and  variety,  consisting  of  lofty  mountains, 
wide  valleys,  bold  headlands,  luxuriant  forests,  cultivated 
fields,  pretty  villages  and  settlements,  some  of  them  stretch- 
ing up  along  the  mountains,  fertile  islands,  rocky  islets,  and 
tributary  rivers  ;  wliile  on  the  bosom  of  the  St.  Lawrence, 
with  a  breadth  varying  from  ten  to  twenty  miles,  ships, 
brigs,  and  schooners,  with  innumerable  pilot-boats  and 
river-craft  in  active  motion,  charm  the  eye  of  the  traveller. 
The  scenery  on  approaching  Quebec  is  truly  magnificent :  on 

*  Martin,  vol.  i.,  p.  230. 


y 


)S0 


in 
of 

ted 


nd 
Ice, 


nd 
ler. 

on 


nUEHEC  AND  OXTAKIO  PI^OVIXCES. 


139 


tlie  left,  Point  Levi,  with  iti^  romantic  chiircli  and  cottaj^'cs ; 
on  the  right,  the  western  part  of  Orleans  Isle,  whi(;h  closely 
resembles  our  own  Devonsliiro  coast.  Beyond,  the  lofty 
mainland  opens  to  view,  and  tlio  spectator's  attention  is 
riveted  by  the  magnificent  Falls  of  Montmorency— a  river 
as  large  as  the  Thames  at  Richmond — which  precipitates  its 
vast  volume  of  constantly  flowing  waters  over  a  perpen- 
dicular precipice  two  hundred  and  forty  feet  in  height.  The 
eye  then  runs  along  miles  of  richly  cultivated  country, 
terminating  in  a  ridge  of  mountains,  with  the  city  and 
battlements  of  Quebec,  rising  in  the  form  of  an  amphitheatre, 
cresting,  as  it  were,  the  ridge  of  Capo  Diamond,  and 
majestically  towering  above  the  surrounding  country,  as  if 
destined  to  be  the  capital  of  an  empire.'* 

From  Quebec  the  panorama  continues,  with  less  grandeur, 
for  about  two  hundred  miles,  when  Montreal  is  reached,  a 
city  larger  and  handsomer  than  Quebec,  though  with  fewer 
natural  or  artificial  defences.    It  stands  on  an  island  in  the 
middle  of  the  St.  Lawrence.     Here  the  river  ceases  to  be 
navigable  by  large  vessels  ;  but  it  passes  through  scenery  as 
attractive  as  that  on  the   eastern  side  of  Quebec,  till   it 
reaches  Kingston,  where  the  waters  widen  into  Lake  Ontario, 
to  contract  again  at  the  famous  Falls  of  Niagara,  opposite 
to  ""vhich  is  the  noble  city  of  Toronto  ;  and  beyond  it,  fed 
by  the  same  river,  under  different  names,  arc  Lakes  Erie, 
Huron,  Michigan,  and  Superior.     There,  with  the  province 
of  Ontario,  old  Canada  ends,  and  the  waters  cease  to  be 
a  boundary  between  British  America  and  the  United  States. 
Northward  of  this  splendid  barrier  are  lofty  mountains 
and  fertile  plains,  dense  forests,  and  varied  lakes  and  rivers, 
as  far  as  the   shores    of    Hudson's    Bay.     Ontario,    less 
mountainous  than  the  eastern  province,  is  for  the  most  part 
a  vast  plain,  diversified  by  hills,  and  covered  with  luxuriant 


vegetation. 


Wheat  and  other  grain  are  cultivated  where 


the  noble  forests  have  been  removed ;  but  forest-lands,  con- 
taining maple,  beech,  oak,  bayw^od,  elm,  hickory,  walnut, 

*  Martin,  vol.  i.,  p.  56. 


f 


'  if  :!!il 


m 


I   -t 


■11 


I40 


BRITISH  NORTH  AMERICA. 


h\m 


\  '\ 


\ 


■H' 


f ' 


i    I 


\i 


,  ! 


:  h  ' !  \ 


:   I 

I  I 


!     I 


f 

1        ! 

J. 

! 

I'l 

u 

1 

chestnut,  cherry,  birch,  cedar,  and  pine,  all  of  largest  growth, 
abound.  '  The  autumnal  tints  of  tlicso  forests,  even  on 
cloudy  days,  are  so  brilliant  that  the  yellow  leaves  give  tho 
impression  of  sunshine,  each  leaf  presenting  a  point  of 
sparkling  gold.  The  hues  change  from  day  to  day,  and  pink, 
lilac,  vermilion,  purple,  deep  blue  and  brown,  combine  to 
form  a  gorgeous  mass  of  colouring  that  surpasses  imagina- 
tion. Even  the  decay  of  the  aged  and  fallen  trees  is  con- 
cealed by  a  mantel  of  geraniums,  honeysuckles,  foxgloves, 
and  flowers.'*  Timber,  thus  furnished  in  such  profusion, 
is  still  the  staple  article  of  Canadian  commerce,  being 
chiefly  collected  in  the  far  west,  and  floated  eastward  along 
the  course  of  the  Ottawa. 

The  old  lumber  trade,  however,  hp<5  not  of  late  years 
increased  in  as  large  proportic  =•  tb'^  le  in  grains,  roots, 
fruits,  live-stock,  and  other  and  pastoral  pro- 

duce. In  Quebec  and  Ontr  "*o,  as  n.  .  wilder  parts  to  the 
west  and  north,  the  fore  or  many  of  them,  are  being 
gradually  cleared  or  replaced  by  farms,  and  prosperous 
towns  have  arisen  where  straggling  forts  and  villages  were 
sparsely  dotted  about. 

The  province  of  Quebec,  though  older  and  larger,  has 
been  outstripped  by  Ontario  in  wealth  and  population.  Of 
the  1,359,000  inhabitants  of  this  province  in  1881,  three- 
fourths  were  of  French  origin,  retaining  many  of  the  primi- 
tive ways  of  their  forefathers.  Quebec,  the  capital,  and 
practically  a  seaport,  had  then  65,000  inhabitants,  while 
there  were  173,000  in  Montreal,  the  commercial  metropolis 
and  headquarters  of  the  grain  trade.  In  Ontario  there  was 
a  population  of  nearly  2,000,000,  with  125,000  in  Toronto, 
which  is  the  capital  of  the  province,  though  Ottawa,  with 
31,000  in  1881,  is  the  centre  of  government  for  the  whole 
Dominion. 

The  English  element,  which  now  predominates  over  the 
French  in  Ontario,  is  in  Manitob«i.  mixed  with  other 
European  races,  as  well  as  with  a  col  'derable  half-caste 

*  Somerville,  'Physical  Geography,'  p.  344. 


ONTARIO  AND  MANITOBA. 


141 


Indian  population,  whilo  uncivilized  Indiana  are  plentiful 
outside  the  towns.  This  latter  province,  reshaped  out  of 
the  old  Red  Iliver  settlement,  is  about  half  as  lar^'o  as 
Ontario  or  Quebec,  but  contained  in  188G  ouly  about  1()H,000 
inhabitants,  of  whom  nearly  an  ei^dith  were  in  Winnipef,', 
its  chief  town,  built  on  the  site  of  Tort  Garry,  the  Hudson's 
Bay  Company's  station.  Its  promotion  to  the  dif^nity  of  a 
province  in  1870,  with  a  settled  j^overnment  in  accordance 
with  the  rules  laid  down  for  the  Dominion,  was  the  sequel  to 
the  Red  River  rebellion  of  18G9,  when  Colonel — afterwards 
Lord — Wolseley  had  some  dilliculty  in  crusliing  the  re- 
sistance offered  by  Riel  and  his  hardy  comrades  to  En<,'lish 
interference  with  them.  This  rebellion  constitutes  the  most 
memorable  episode  in  the  recent  political  history  of  Canada, 
and,  though  Riel  was  defeated  in  1870,  and  for  some  time 
had  a  seat  in  the  Manitoba  Legislature,  the  spirit  of  defiance 
arou.-,L!d  by  him  was  not  easily  overcome,  and  never  survived 
his  execution,  after  another  abortive  rising,  in  188G. 

The  conflict  of  races  here,  as  elsewhere,  has  had  incidents 
by  no  means  creditable  to  the  high-handed  policy  of  English 
aggressors ;  but  there  has  been  much  less  to  complain  of  in 
Manitoba  than  in  some  other  of  our  colonies,  and  the  pro- 
gress of  this  province  since  1870  has  been  in  many  ways 
gratifying.  In  1871  its  white  population  was  les?  ihan 
19,000,  and  there  were  only  241  residents  in  Winnipeg, 
which  sixteen  years  later  claimed  to  have  at  least  25,000. 
'  It  was  hero,'  to  quote  the  glowing  words  used  by  Lord 
Dufferin  when  he  was  Governor-General,  *  that  Canada, 
emerging  from  her  woods  and  forests,  first  gazed  upon  her 
rolling  prairies  and  unexplored  North-West,  and  learnt,  as 
by  an  unexpected  revelation,  that  her  historical  territories  of 
the  Canadas,  her  eastern  seaboards  of  New  Brunswick, 
Labrador,  and  Nova  Scotia,  her  Lawrentian  lakes  and 
valleys,  cornlands  and  pastures,  though  themselves  more 
extensive  than  half  a  dozen  European  kingdoms,  were  but 
the  vestibules  and  antechambers  to  that,  till  then,  undreamt- 
of dominion,  whose  illimitable  dimensions  ahke  confound 


i  t 


\:--X 


■""■ 


142 


BRITISH  NORTH  AMERICA. 


f  !   !! 


'  I 


the  arithmetic  of  the  surveyor  aud  the  verification  of  the 
explorer.  It  was  here  that,  counting  her  past  achievements 
as  but  the  preface  and  prelude  to  her  future  exertions  and 
expanding  destinies,  she  took  a  fresh  departure,  received  the 
alHatus  of  a  more  imperial  inspiration,  and  felt  herself  no 
longer  a  mere  settler  along  tlie  banks  of  a  single  river,  but 
the  owner  of  half  a  continent,  and,  in  the  magnitude  of  her 
possessions,  in  the  wealtli  of  her  resources,  in  the  sinews  of 
her  material  might,  tlie  peer  of  any  power  on  the  earth.' 

To  the  north  and  north-west  of  Manitoba  and  Canada 
proper  is  a  vast  extent  of  wilderness,  the  hunting-ground  of 
the  Hudson's  Bay  Company  and  its  successors,  gradually 
becoming  more  bai-ren  and  inaccessible  as  it  approaches  the 
Arctic  Eegion.  To  the  west  is  a  huge  sweep  of  prairie-land, 
comprising  some  400,000  square  miles,  and  including  the 
districts  of  Assiniboia,  Saskatchewan,  and  Alberta,  well 
watered,  and  blessed  with  a  temperate  climate,  of  which  use 
has  only  been  made  since,  by  the  construction  of  the 
Canadian  Pacific  Railway,  they  have  been  brought  into  com- 
nmnication  with  the  older  provinces  on  the  east,  and  with 
British  Columbia  on  the  otliei-  side  of  the  Rocky  Mountains. 

British  Columbia,  stretching  from  the  Rocky  Mountains 
to  the  Pacific,  and  from  the  United  States  boundary-line  to 
Alaska,  the  territory  lately  ceded  to  the  United  States  by 
Russia,  forms  something  like  an  oblong  block  about  600 
miles  long  and  nearly  400  broad.  With  Vancouver  Island, 
which  in  size  and  shape  somewhat  resembles  Nova  Scotia, 
and  in  climate  and  fertility  is  considered  to  be  on  a  par  with 
England,  it  comprises  about  390,000  square  miles.  Both 
the  mainland  and  the  island  have  rapidly  acquired  im- 
portance in  recent  years  through  the  discovery  of  gold  in 
the  one,  and  the  convenience  of  the  port  of  Victoria  in  the 
other  as  a  halting-place  for  travellers  in  search  of  the 
glittering  treasure.  But  both,  and  especially  Vancouver 
Island,  are  rich  in  timber,  coal,  copper,  iron,  and  other 
natural  commodities,  and  are  j,dmirably  adapted  for  agri- 
cultural pursuits. 


Is  \ 


BRITISH  COLUMBIA  AND  VANCOUVER  ISLAND.   143 

Vancouver  Island  is  more  interesting  and  promising  than 
most  other  parts  of  British  Columbia.  About  290  miles 
long  and  froin  50  to  70  broad,  it  is  nearly  covered  with 
pine  forests,  except  where  the  conflagrations  frequent  there 
have  laid  bare  surfaces  some  miles  in  extent.  The  plants 
and  animals  found  in  it  are  very  similar  to  those  with 
which  Englishmen  are  familiar  ;  but  their  immense  number 
and  predominance  over  the  whole  district  greatly  alter  tlio 
impression  made  by  them.  Outside  Victoria  and  the  few 
other  settlements  the  European  colonists  have  as  yet 
hardly  set  their  mark  ;  and  the  wild  Indians,  wandering 
from  place  to  place,  or  lodging  in  flimsy  huts,  in  no  degree 
occupy  the  rank  proper  to  man  as  master  of  nature. 

These  Indian  tribes  have  the  same  liigli  cheek-bones,  broad 
flat  faces,  long  black  hair  and  copper  complexion,  as  their 
kinsmen  on  the  continent ;  but  the  men  of  some  tribes  are 
taller  and  stronger.  They  are  described  by  travellers  as 
being  nearly  all  equally  barbarous,  greater  strength  of  body 
only  coming  in  aid  of  the  same  ferocity  of  mind.  Individuals 
have  deadly  strifes  with  one  another ;  tribes  maintain 
hereditary  feuds.  '  Treachery  and  artifice,'  we  are  told, 
'  constitute  the  base  of  their  tactics  in  war.  They  appear 
insensible  to  anything  like  chivalry  or  generous  feeling, 
killing  and  slaying  with  remc"  oless  cruelty,  undeterred  by 
any  sentiment  of  compunction.'  They  build  huts  with 
posts  and  beams,  often  large  and  commodious,  but  always 
so  fitteci  as  to  bo  easily  transferred  from  one  place  to 
another.  Their  dress  consists  of  a  blanket  tied  round  the 
body  with  strips  of  bark,  and  their  tattooing  is  sometimes 
really  ornamental.  They  are  skilful  huntsmen  and  excel- 
lent fishermen,  and  in  the  art  of  cooking  salmon,  of  which 
good  specimens  are  to  be  met  with  all  along  the  coast,  they 
claim  to  be  connoisseurs.  *  The  true  Indian  method  of 
cooking  a  salmon  consists  in  putting  it  into  a  wooden  bowl 
with  water,  which  is  made  to  boil  by  dropping  in  rcd-luit 
stones.'  The  canoes,  in  the  manufacture  of  which  the 
natives  show  considerable  skill,  not  only  are  so  much  used 


f 


1  <  •  i< 


,1  ■ 


■^pa 


144 


BRITISH  NORTH  AMERICA. 


,ii  I 


^1 


\ 


1 


I  !i 
if 't 


i  i 


if 


\  i 


I  ii 


■i  i   J 


1  ■!    ! 


til 


in  lifetime  that  no  Indian  when  out  01  them  can  move  his 
limbs  in  a  graceful  way,  but  also  generally  serve  as  tombs 
for  the  dead.  Often  each  tribe  finds  a  little  rocky  island  at 
a  short  distance  from  the  coast,  and  thither  the  canoe, 
freighted  with  its  owner's  corpse  and  his  principal  weapons 
and  other  articles,  is  taken,  to  be  dragged  on  shore,  and 
left.  Among  some  tribes  it  is  the  practice  to  place  their 
dead  in  boxes  upon  the  branches  of  trees  ;  and  with  a  few 
others  cremation  is  said  to  be  the  rule.* 

Victoria,  the  capital  of  Vancouver  Island,  is  favourably 
placed  on  the  south-eastern  corner  of  the  island.  Its  popu- 
lation increased  from  about  500  in  1858  to  more  than  14,000 
in  1887,  when  it  began  to  grow  much  more  rapidly  under 
the  impetus  of  the  railway  and  steamship  communications 
meeting  in  it.  Many  stories  are  told  of  the  easy  money- 
making  of  its  inhabitants.  *  There  is  a  person,'  it  was 
said  in  1865,  'luxuriating  in  England  at  the  present 
moment,  who  went  to  the  island  as  a  poor  ship's  carpenter. 
When  the  rush  of  immigration  came  in  1858,  he  and  his 
wife  were  living  behind  the  bar  of  a  small  public-house,  the 
resort  of  sailors.  He  bought  about  £40  or  £60  worth  of 
property  after  he  arrived,  which  now  brings  him  the  hand- 
some income  of  £4,000  per  annum.  Another  inhabitant 
brought  to  the  country  £60  in  1857,  and  the  land  he  pur- 
chased with  that  amount  now  realizes  to  him  £80  a  month. 't 
Later  records  are  yet  more  astonishing.  The  neighbouring 
town  of  Vancouver,  however^  at  the  south-western  extremity 
of  the  mainland,  seems  destined  to  surpass  Victoria  and  to 
become  a  superior  rival  to  San  Francisco,  as  a  great  mart 
for  trade  along  the  shores  of  the  Pacific  Ocean,  and,  across 
it,  to  China  and  the  East  Indies.  Only  started,  as  the 
terminus  of  the  Canadian  and  Pacific  Railway,  in  1885,  it 
had  two  years  afterwards  a  population  of  more  than  5,000. 

The  resources  of  these  most  western,  as  well  as  of  the 

*  'Travels    in  British  Columbia   and    round  Vancouver  Island,'  by 
Captain  C.  E.  Barret-Lennard. 
I  Macfie,  '  Vancouver  Island  and  British  Columbia,'  p.  89. 


I 


BRITISH  COLUMBIA  AND  VANCOUVER  ISLAND.  145 


lis 


of 
id- 

mt 


to 
lart 

)SS 

the 
it 


bhe 
by 


central,  portions  of  the  Canadian  Dominion  are  still  wholly 
undeveloped.  The  rush  of  gold-seekers,  while  leading  the 
way  to  healthier  colonization,  at  the  same  time  presented 
obstacles  thereto.  Reckless  adventurers  introduced^  lawless 
ways  which  hindered  the  progress  of  quiet  settlers.  The 
experiences  of  travellers  and  emigrants  show  that  both 
British  Columbia  and  Vancouver  Island  offer  wonderful 
advantages  for  settlers;  but  neither  they  nor  any  other 
portions  of  the  world  can  afford  comfortable  resting-places 
for  those  who  desire  more  than  may  be  fairly  earned  by 
their  own  brains  and  hands.  Those  who  seek  for  gold  have 
the  chance  of  rapid  fortune,  but  also  the  chance  of  starva- 
tion and  of  moral  ruin.  But  the  patient  and  persevering 
miner  will  find  ample  stores  of  copper,  iron,  and  coal, 
always  surer  sources  of  wealth  than  the  more  precious 
mineral ;  and  to  another  class  of  emigrant,  the  man  with 
manufacturing  talent,  there  is  a  wide  field  of  prosperity. 
The  plentiful  timbers  of  the  province,  joined  to  its  other  re- 
sources, offer  strong  inducements  to  the  shipbuilder;  and 
the  vessels  constructed  by  him  can  rarely  lack  cargoes  of 
raw  material,  for  which  Asia  and  Europe  will  gladly  pay  in 
cheaper  and  better  commodities  than  the  native  market 
can  produce.  That  is  a  state  of  things  not  to  be  brought 
about  in  a  day,  nor  in  a  few  years ;  but  if  patient  industry 
is  employed,  it  must  needs  arrive  in  due  time. 


•   I 


I  \\ 


!"  '1 


:i''^ 


10 


i  ^1 


11 


it     :! 


i     I 


!   !    ,1 

'hi: 

*  ''    ■  r 

1:1 

i        '  '   ' 

\ 

CIIArTEIl  XIJ. 

KIGIITEENTH   CENTURY   CHANGES. 

01,n  AND  NKW  rOI.OM/.INO  rOMCIKH— KKFKCTM  OF  KrUOrRAN  WAllS  ON 
l'OI,l  ,1AL  IIISTOUY — THK  HITUKMACV  OK  KNtil.AND— OUR  MKDITKKHANKAN 
I'OisaKSSlONS— (IIUKALTAK-MALTA      CTl'lUS  — IIKMCOI.AND.      ( 170  1-lSS.H.  j 

URTNG  the  century  following  ]*iii«j;land's  loss  of 
lier  old  plantations  on  the  American  mainland, 
another  group  of  huge  colonies,  as  we  have  seen, 
has  been  acquired  and  developed  further  north, 
and  the  Dominion  of  Canada,  if  not  so  populous 
or  prospcH'ous,  comprises  an  area  greater  even  than  that  of 
the  Unit(Hl  States.  Our  smaller  colonics  on  the  western  side 
of  tlie  Atlantic,  in  the  West  Indies  and  tropical  America, 
have  made  less  progress ;  but  the  growth  of  British  North 
America  has  been  rivalled,  and  in  some  particulars  sur- 
passed, by  the  growth  of  our  Australasian  colonies,  while 
there  has  also  been  remarkable,  if  less  healthy,  growth  of 
British  colonization  in  South  Africa  Before  we  review 
these  later  acquisitions,  and  some  others  in  the  distant 
south  and  east,  however,  mention  must  bo  made  of  the 
important  change,  in  so  far  as  our  colonial  history  has  been 
affected  by  it,  wliich,  in  the  eighteenth  century,  took  place 
in  the  relations  between  Great  Britain  and  the  other  figlit- 
ing  and  colonizing  nations  of  Europe.  Incidents  of  that 
change,  and  of  the  political  rearrangements  involved  in  it, 
were  our  winning  of  Canada  and  the  increase  of  our  West 
Indian  possessions.    It  also  led  directly  to  the  great  exten- 


i 


OLD  COLONIAL  POLICY. 


147 


that 
n  it, 
IVest 
Lten- 


eion  of  our  oinpini  in  Fndia  and  oilmr  partH  of  Aflia,  as  well 
aH  in  Africa,  and  indirectly  to  all  our  coloni/ing  onterpriH(3 
in  Mi(!  Pav^ific  Ocean. 

Spain  led  tiio  way,  followed  by  Portugal,  Holland,  and 
Franco,  aa  well  aw  })y  England,  in  tlio  famous  business  of 
coloinal  conquest  which  was  begun  early  in  tho  sixteenth 
century,  and  vigorously  continued  through  tho  sevonteonth 
and  afterwards.  It  was  for  a  long  time  a  business  of  con- 
quest, much  more  than  of  colonization,  as  wo  now  under- 
stand the  term.  Spaniards,  Portuguese,  Dutchmen,  I'Vcinch 
and  Englishmen,  obtained  permission  from  their  sovereigns, 
or  went  out  without  permission,  to  discover  and  take  ])0S- 
R(>ssion  of  any  lands  they  could  seize  in  the  Now  World  or 
in  the  Old,  wheiher  sparsisly  peopled  by  savages  or  crowded 
by  the  inlieritoi's  of  ancient  civilizations;  but  their  avowed 
pur])oso  was  trade,  as  they  called  it,  with  so  much  military 
occupation  as  was  necessary  to  procuring  the  wealth  they 
sought.  Even  when  they  conquered  vast  territories  like 
Mexico  and  Peru,  and  when  the  settlements  of  Europeans 
were  numerous  enough  to  give  fresh  colour  or  taint  to  tho 
native  populations,  tho  usurpers  were  comparatively  few, 
and  no  more  were  encouraged  or  allowed  than  there  was 
need  for  in  order  to  establish  the  mastery  that  was  indispen- 
sable to  the  objects  they  had  in  view. 

This  arrangement  has  lasted  with  but  little  variation  till 
recent  times  in  tho  Old  World,  especially  in  India,  and  in 
less  degree  in  South  Africa.  It  soon  began  to  bo  modified 
in  tho  New  World,  and  notably  by  the  English.  Tho 
Indians  in  tho  West  Indies  and  on  the  American  continent 
wore  reduced,  as  far  as  could  be,  to  slavery,  or,  if  they 
preferred  death  to  slavery,  or  sank  under  their  bondage, 
they  were  in  large  measure  exterminated,  and  when  there 
was  dearth  of  Indian  slaves,  negroes  from  Africa  were  im- 
ported to  take  their  place.  Europeans  of  all  races  soon 
began  to  really  settle,  and  make  their  homes  in  the  new 
countries,  and  in  increasing  numbers  with  each  generation  ; 
but  even  when  they  were  most  plentiful  they  were  for  a 

10—2 


liJ: 


i> 


i  I 


,! 


I     I 


!l 


148 


EIGIITEFNTII  CENTURY  CHANGES. 


long  time  only  small  minorities  among  the  black  and  red 
men  over  wliom  they  tyrannized.  Gradually,  however,  an 
approach  was  made  towards  the  modern  idea  of  colonization, 
and  especially  in  the  settlements  or  plantations  that  owed 
their  origin  or  vigour  to  the  exiles  or  fugitives,  expatriated 
on  religious  and  political  grounds,  from  England.  From 
France  and  the  Netherlands,  Huguenots  and  others  went  to 
Canada  and  elsewhere  in  search  of  peace  and  liberty ;  but 
there  were  larger  migrations  of  English  Puritans  to  New 
England  and  the  adjacent  districts,  and  just  as  these  lied 
from  Stuart  oppression,  there  were  also  cavaliers  and  Cat)  10- 
lics  who  were  driven  across  the  Atlantic  by  the  Puritanism 
dominaKo  for  a  time  in  the  mother  country.  Tlie  New 
World  profited  by  the  misgovernmcnt  in  the  Old  World, 
which  helped  to  people  it  with  wliite  men.  Yet  this  wortliior 
sort  of  colonization  was  at  best  but  slow  and  partial,  and 
for  such  progress  as  the  young  colonies  made  they  owed 
nothing  to  the  kindness  or  wisdom  of  statesmen  at  home. 
'  We  plant  tobacco  and  Puritanism  only,  like  fools,'  it  was 
complained  in  an  English  State  paper  of  1638 ;  and  more 
than  half  a  century  later  it  is  recorded,  'An  Attorney-General 
in  the  reign  of  William  and  Mary,  being  applied  to  in  favour 
of  a  college  which  it  was  proposed  to  found  in  Virginia,  and 
being  invited  to  reflect  that  the  people  of  Virginia  had  souls 
to  be  saved  as  well  as  the  people  of  England,  answered, 
"  Souls  !  Damn  your  souls !  Make  tobacco  !"  '  It  was  by 
a  long  course  of  meddling  and  bullying,  neglect  of  all  the 
true  interests  of  the  colonies,  and  persistent  and  exclu.ilvc 
use  or  abuse  of  them  as  sources  of  revenue  for  the  British 
Government  and  merchants  and  politicians  at  home,  that 
the  American  War  of  Independence  was  brought  about. 

Through  nearly  two  centuries,  however,  the  colonies  of 
the  various  European  nations  were  constant  sources  of 
quarrel  among  the  rival  governments,  and  frequent  causes 
of  actual  warfare  between  them.  In  the  struggle  for  '  the 
balance  of  power,'  waged  fitfully,  but  with  scant  pause,  by 
sea  and  on  land,  from  the  German  Ocean  down  to  the 


'Mi 


ise. 


the 

by 


Ito  the 


IVAA!  AND  COLONIZATION. 


149 


Mcclitcrmiican,  between  ]']ii^disli,  Freiicli,  Spaniards,  Dutch- 
men, and  others,  their  several  possessions  in  America,  Asia, 
and  Africa  were  involved,  and  tliosc  possessions,  bein^'  tempt- 
ing prey  and  easy  spoil,  were  repeatedly  attacked  and  often 
conquered  and  reconquered,  the  only  benefit,  such  as  it 
was,  derived  from  the  cruel  striie  being  that  it  greatly  con- 
duced to  the  development  of  seamanship,  and  was  particu- 
larly helpful  to  the  steady  p"ogross  of  England  towards 
naval  supremacy  over  all  her  rivals.  At  length  a  crisis  was 
reached  in  1763,  when  the  Definitive  Treaty,  as  it  was  called, 
between  England,  France,  and  Spain,  assigned  Canada  and 
many  smaller  French  colonies  to  England,  and  thus  almost 
crushed  the  colonial  enterprise  of  France,  without  in  any 
way  strengthening  the  colonial  enterpris ;  of  Spain,  which, 
in  spite  of  the  vast  areas  over  which  it  extended,  and  mainly 
because  of  their  vastness,  was  already  rapidly  decaying. 
The  Definitive  Treaty  was  soon  followed  by  other  fighting, 
culminating  in  the  great  Napoleonic  wars  of  the  ensuing  half 
century  ;  and  it  was  not  till  after  the  Treaty  of  Paris,  conse- 
quent on  the  "^^ienna  Congress,  had  been  signed  in  1817  that 
the  irksome  and  lamentable  series  of  disturbances  in  colonial 
history,  due  to  the  jealousies  of  the  European  nations,  was 
brought  to  a  close.  The  outcome  of  these  disturbances, 
especially  between  the  two  treaties  of  1763  and  1817,  must 
be  noted,  if  we  arc  to  understand  the  conditions  under 
which  English  colonization  has  advanced  in  modern  times. 

Having,  in  1763,  wrested  from  the  French  all  their  posses- 
sions in  North  America,  as  well  as  their  West  Indian  islands, 
and  being  still  nominal  masters  of  the  United  Provinces 
south  of  the  St.  Lawrence,  the  English  were  not  eager  to 
extend  their  dominions  on  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic ; 
but  they  had  for  a  long  time  been  greedy  sharers  of  the 
wealth  procured  from  the  East  Indies,  though  there  the 
Dutch  traders  were  far  more  successful,  and  both  the  French 
and  the  Portuguese  claimed  to  compete  with  them.  The 
Portuguese  pretensions,  at  one  time  stupendous,  were  now 
little  more  than  shadows ;   and  the  En  lish  East  India 


n 


!        !i 


i 

1 

■,:l 

i 
! 

ISO 


EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY  CHANGES. 


!  • 

f  i    i 


!i 


\ 


i 


SI  '    i 


I    i 


C!oin])any  had  boeii  steadily  ^'aiiiiiig  ground  during  a  century 
and  a  lialf  as  the  chief  opponent  of  the  Dutch.  When  tiio 
French  lost  their  footing  in  America,  tlicy  not  oidy  retaliated 
on  their  English  conquerors  there  by  fomenting  the  discon- 
tent of  the  New  England  colonists,  and  aiding  them  when 
they  wore  ready  to  claim  their  independence,  but  they  also 
quickened  their  enterprise  in  the  East,  and  on  the  way 
thither.  Hence,  before  war  was  openly  revived,  arose  fresh 
contests  between  the  French  and  English  trading  companies ; 
and  when  Europe  was  deluged  with  blood  in  consequence 
of  our  crusade  against  the  French  revolutionists,  and,  a 
few  years  later,  against  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  there  was 
desperate  struggling  also  in  all  the  remote  comitries  and 
colonies  in  which  the  rivals  could  come  into  collision. 
England  gained  immensely  thereby,  and  in  some  parts  very 
easily.  The  conquest  of  Holland  by  the  French  in  1795 
resulted  in  the  hoisting  of  the  French  flag  in  all  the  Dutch 
possessions — in  Cape  Colony,  Malacca,  Cochm,  Ceylon,  and 
elsewhere,  as  well  as  in  the  Dutch  settlements  in  India ; 
and,  as  most  of  the  Dutch  settlers  and  colonists  preferred 
English  to  French  rule,  their  transference  to  the  dominion 
of  England  was  effected  quickly  ar  d  with  but  little  trouble. 
In  1810,  indeed,  we  were  masters  of  all  the  French  posses- 
sions abroad — in  South  America  as  well  as  in  the  East 
Indies — and  also  of  all  the  Dutch  possessions,  except  those 
which,  throwing  off  the  yoke  of  France,  had  succeeded  in 
eluding  that  of  England.  By  the  Peace  of  1814,  confirmed 
in  1817,  many  of  these  acquisitions  were  restored  to  their 
former  owners  ;  but  England  retained  nearly  as  many  as  she 
cared  for.  She  was  henceforth  supreme,  and  had  all  but  a 
complete  monopoly,  in  India.  She  was  mistress  of  Ceylon, 
Mauritius,  and  the  Cape.  She  reserved  to  herself  the 
portion  of  Guiana  which  was  nearest  to  her  West  Indian 
colonies ;  and  she  maintained  her  hold  on  Malta,  the  central 
island  in  the  Mediterranean,  which  had  been  taken  from  the 
French  in  1802;  as  well  as  of  Gibraltar,  which  had  been 
wrested  from  the  Spaniards  as  far  back  a§  1704. 


I  • 


31011. 

very 

1795 

lutcli 

,  and 

idia ; 

erred 

inion 

uble. 
sses- 
East 
those 
ed  in 
rraed 
their 
ssho 
but  a 
ylon, 
[   the 
ndian 
entral 
mthe 
been 


ENGLAND'S  COLONIAL  SUPREMACY. 


'5' 


Gibraltar  and  Malta  are  scarcely  colonics,  and,  except  as 
re^'ards  their  stratej^Mc  advanta^'es,  are  of  slight  importance  ; 
but  reference  must  be  made  to  tliem,  and  to  some  other 
minor  British  possessions,  before  we  resume  our  survey  of 
the  larger  sections  and  ramifications  of  our  Empire. 

The  seizure  of  Gibraltar  by  England  marked  a  memorable 
stage  in  the  decadence  of  Spain  as  a  great  JCuropcan,  and  yet 
more  as  a  groat  colonial,  power.    Its  retention  was  a  menace, 
so  long  as  any  threat  was  needed,  to  the  nation  whicli,  before 
1704  and  down  to  1808,  when  Napoleon's  occupation  of 
Spain  led   to  the  secession  of   its  dominions  in  America, 
claimed  to  have  more  extensive  possessions  abroad,  and 
larger  territorial  rights,  than   any  other  European  State. 
Unable  to  expel  the  English  from  the  fortified  rock,  which 
gave  its  occupants  absolute  control  over  the  Mediterranean, 
the  Spaniards  were  equally  unable  to  maintain  any  real 
authority  over  their  vast  dependencies,  and  that  authority 
dwindled  away  long  before  its  gaudy  symbols  were  pulled 
down.     The  value  of  Gibraltar  to  Enj  'and  as  the  key  to  the 
Mediterranean  also  has  lessened ;  for,  though  its  fortifica- 
tions are  elaborately  kept  up,  they  might  not  be  able  t^o  with- 
stand such  attacks  as  could  now  be  made  upon  them  from  the 
sea,  were  occasion  or  opportunity  to  arise  for  use  of  all  the 
appliances  of  modern  naval  warfare.     It  is  still,  however, 
a  formidable  fortress,  garrisoned  by  about   5,000   British 
troops,  and  with   a   civilian   population   of  nearly  20,000, 
which  adds  smuggling  to  the  legitimate  trade  incident  to  its 
situation  as  a  convenient  coaling-station  for  ships,  and  a 
ready  mart  for  travellers. 

Malta  is  a  somewhat  larger,  and,  in  some  respects,  a  more 
usetul  British  possession.  The  history  of  this  little  island, 
and  of  the  smaller  island  of  Gozo  adjacent  to  it,  is  full 
of  interest,  abounding  in  relics  and  accretions  of  perhaps  a 
longer  and  more  diversified  series  of  colonizations  than  any 
other  part  of  the  world.  Its  earliest  inhabitants,  or  the 
earliest  of  whom  anything  is  known,  were  Phoenicians,  who, 
in  the  thirteenth  or  fourteenth  century  before  Christ,  found 


t  '. 


1 


fii         i 

«  ■ 

'  ■!< 

'<i 


w 


\ 

.  .1 

\                               ; 

i  it 

:^ 

m 

w 


I  Ml'! 


ji 

111!: 
!l 


I 


';      I 


I     I 


152 


EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY  CHANGES. 


it  a  convenient  halting-placo  for  their  ships  and  traders 
going  out  into  the  western  world.  Phoenician  coins,  house- 
hold utensils,  and  implements  of  all  sorts  have  been  found 
in  various  parts  of  both  Malta  and  Gozo ;  where  also  are 
the  ruins  of  ancient  towns  and  temples,  and  sepulchral 
caves  and  grottoes.  After  the  Phoenicians  had  been  in 
possession  of  the  islands  for  six  or  seven  hundred  years,  they 
were  mastered  by  the  Greeks,  and  associated  in  some  way 
with  the  more  important  Greek  colonies  in  Syracuse  and 
other  parts  of  Sicily.  Then  Malta  fell  into  the  hands  of  the 
Carthaginians,  who  restored,  with  alterations,  the  institu- 
tions of  their  Phoenician  ancestors.  Malta  was  the  scene  of 
more  than  one  battle  during  the  Punic  wars ;  and  its  ad- 
vantages as  a  naval  station  being  coveted  by  the  Romans,  it 
lecame  a  Boman  possession  in  b.c.  220,  and  so  continued 
for  about  five  centuries.  If  the  historians  are  to  be  trusted, 
it  was  never  more  prosperous  than  while  it  was  a  Eoman 
pro-consulate ;  and,  in  claiming  to  be  the  island  Melita,  on 
which  St.  Paul  was  shipwrecked,  it  also  claims  to  have  been 
one  of  the  first  places  out  of  Asia  in  which  Chris^'anity  was 
established.  At  Citti  Vecchia,  the  ancient  capital,  are  ex- 
tensive catacombs ;  and,  among  many  other  relics,  a  cave 
in  which,  according  to  tradition,  St.  Paul  performed  a  three 
months'  penance.  Evil  days  fell  on  the  island  when,  on  the 
breaking  up  of  the  Boman  Empire,  it  became  an  appanage 
of  the  Byzantine  dominion.  In  a.d.  870  it  was  conquered 
by  the  Arabs,  who  held  it  against  all  invaders  for  at  least 
two  centuries,  and  have  left  their  mark,  not  only  in  the 
language,  but  also  in  the  physical  aspect  of  the  present 
inhabitants.  It  was  next  occupied  by  Norman  invaders, 
and  was  under  the  sway  they  established  in  Sicily  until  the 
twelfth  century,  when,  as  an  adjunct  of  Sicily,  it  was  in- 
cluded in  the  realm  of  the  German  emperors.  In  1530  the 
great  Charles  the  Fifth  granted  it  as  an  asylum  to  the 
Knights  of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem,  after  their  expulsion  from 
Rhodes ;  and  it  was  ruled  until  1798  by  these  Knights,  who 
converted  its  rugged  northern  promontory  into  the,  in  those 


bnt 
rs, 
Ihe 
in- 
Ihe 
Ihe 

)m 
Iho 

Ise 


MALTA  AND  CYPRUS. 


153 


days,  impregnable  fortress  of  Valetta,  still  a  most  imposing 
city  of  handsome  palaces  and  threatening  ramparts.  Napo- 
leon expelled  the  Knights  in  179B,  when  he  was  on  his  way 
to  conquer  Egypt ;  and  in  1800,  at  the  request  and  with  the 
assistance  of  the  natives,  Napoleon's  French  garrison  was 
expelled  by  the  English.  Since  then,  the  transfer  being 
confirmed  by  the  Treaty  of  Paris  in  1814,  it  has  been  an 
English  possession. 

By  England,  Malta  is  chiefly  used  as  a  naval  station  and 
garrison  on  the  highway  to  India,  but  on  these  accounts, 
and  by  reason  of  its  convenience  as  a  haltiug-place  and 
winter  resort  for  civilian  travellers,  it  is  a  considerable 
trading  centre.  There  is  room  in  its  splendid  harbours  for 
nearly  the  whole  of  the  British  navy,  and  an  army  of  25,000 
soldiers  would  be  required  to  man  all  its  defensive  works, 
which,  it  is  considered,  a  force  of  100,000  would  hardly 
bo  largo  enough  to  invest  completely.  Its  regular  garrison, 
however,  hardly  exceeds  5,000.  The  average  population  of 
Malta,  including  Gozo,  numbers  nearly  160,000,  of  whom 
about  four-fifths  are  Maltese,  about  a  tenth  English  civihaus, 
and  the  remainder  foreigners  of  various  races.  The  area  of 
both  islands  being  only  115  square  miles,  they  are  too 
crowded  to  afford  room  for  immigrants,  except  the  few 
brought  thither  for  purposes  of  trade  or  government,  and 
are,  or  should  be,  nurseries  for  native  emigrants  to  the 
European,  Asiatic,  and  African  shores  of  the  Mediterranean 
and  to  its  less  populous  islands. 

Of  these  islands,  Cyprus,  more  than  thirty  times  as  large 
as  Malta,  but  with  a  population  scarcely  more  numerous, 
has  been  a  British  possession  since  1878.  It,  also,  has  an 
eventful  history,  its  old  Phoenician  settlers  having  been 
conquered  successively  by  Egyptians,  Assyrians,  and 
Romans,  before  it  became  part  of  the  Byzantine  Empire. 
Richard  CcEur  de  Lion,  seizing  it  on  his  way  to  the  Holy 
Land  in  1191,  assumed  sovereignty  over  it  for  a  few  years, 
and  it  was  afterwards  partly  occupied  by  Genoese  and 
others  before  1571,  when  it  was  annexed  to  the  Ottoman 


\ 


\ 


I  : 

1  ! 

I 


*  I 


■lii! 


154 


FJCnTEENTU  CENTUR\  CIMNGES. 


Mil 


I  'I 


Kiiipiro.      During   the    latest    war   betwuuii    Russia    and 
Turkey,  it  was  assigned  to  England  in  return  for  a  promise 
of  J'^nglish  assistance,  in  certain  contingencies,  in  the  defence 
of  Asia  Minor  against  Russian  invasion.     During  the  first 
six  years  of  the  new  rule   its  trade   had   nearly  doubled 
under  English  administration,  but  the  revenues  had  been 
exceeded  hy  the  expenditure,  and  unless  it  can  be  colonized 
by  Maltese  or  otliei's  to  whom  its  climate  and  institutions 
are  congenial,  its  progress  must  bo  slow.     Apart  from  the 
strategic  advantages  with  which  it  is  credited,  and  to  which 
grave  responsibihties  are  attached,  in  the  event  of  England 
being  involved  in  a  war  with  any   of  the  Powers  bordering 
or  approaching  the  Mediterranean  waters,  the  value  to  us 
of  this  recent  acquisition  is  not  apparent.     Its  proximity  to 
the  Suez  Canal  as  well  as  to  Asia  Minor,  however,  may 
render  our  control  over  it  of  some  importance,  should  occa- 
sion arise  for  our  claiming  greater  authority  than  we  now 
exercise  as  regards  the  management  of  that  canal  as  a  route 
to  India  and  our  other  possessions  in  and  beyond  the  Indian 
Ocean. 

Another  so-called  British  colony,  and  the  smallest  of  all, 
is  Heligoland,  which  has  also  been  acquired  solely  for 
*v)litical  reasons.  This  tiny  island,  with  an  area  ?f  less 
than  three-fourths  of  a  square  mile,  in  the  North  Sea  and 
near  the  mouth  of  the  Elbe,  was  captured  in  1807,  and  is 
useful  not  only  as  a  lighthouse  and  signal  station,  but  also 
as  a  summer  bathing  resort. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 


WEST    AFKICA. 


IS 
ISO 


THK    WEST    AKUICAN    SETTLEMKNTS— SIKUHA     LEONR — GAMBIA — CAPK  COAST 

CASTLE— LAGOS.      [1^300-1888.] 

jLMOST  tho  earliest  voyages  of  discovery  under- 
taken by  the  Englisli  were  along  tho  African 
coast,  and  with  the  savage  tribes  of  the  western 
shore  they  very  soon  began  a  rude  trade,  in 
which  cheap  trinkets  and  gewgaws  were  bartered 
for  ivory  and  the  few  other  coninicdities  that  tlie  natives 
had  to  offer.  But  until  a  century  ago  there  was  no  attempt 
at  regular  colonization,  and  the  inhospitable  districts  were 
chiefly  frequented  in  order  that  their  natives  and  the 
captives  brought  by  thcni  from  the  interior  might  be  bought 
or  stolen,  and  taken  as  slaves  to  the  West  Indian  settle- 
ments. Sir  John  Hawkins  was  the  first  slave-trader ;  and 
Queen  Elizabeth,  while  sanctioning  the  commerce,  is  said 
to  have  declared  that  '  it  would  be  detestable,  and  call  down 
the  vengeance  of  Heaven  upon  the  undertakers.'  Cape 
Coast  Castle  was  erected  as  a  well-protected  haunt  for 
these  traders  early  in  the  seventeenth  century  ;  and  soon 
afterwards  James  Fort,  near  the  Gambia,  became  another 
factory  for  the  English,  who  long  maintained  a  fierce  rivalry 
with  tho  Spaniards,  French,  and  Dutch.  In  1787  it  was 
guessed  that  up  to  that  time  ten  million  negroes  had  been 
thus  taken  from  Africa,  the  rate  of  exportation  being  about 


iii?  ' 


H 


'i  i 


I  1 


IS 


.  i  I  i 


i  ■! 


156 


IVEST  AFRICA. 


a  hundred  thousand  a  year.  More  than  a  third  of  the  trade 
was  at  that  time  in  the  hands  of  the  Enghsh.  Then  it  was 
that  Clarkson,  Wilbcrforce,  and  other o  began  the  popular 
opposition  which  ended  in  the  suppression  of  the  skive- 
trade,  so  far  as  law  and  an  aimed  force  could  suppress  it, 
in  1808.  After  that  the  English  had  more  time  to  attend 
to  their  West  African  possessions,  although  as  colonies 
there  is  still  little  to  be  said  about  them. 

These  possessions  are  in  four  groups.  Sierra  Leone,  the 
district  first  visited  by  Hawkins,  was  started  in  1797  as 
an  asylum  for  liberated  slaves,  and  was  largely  used  for  that 
purpose  after  the  abolition  of  the  slave-trade.  Its  un- 
healthy climate,  however,  deters  all  Europeans  who  are  not 
actually  forced  to  reside  in  it.  Among  its  population  of 
some  60,000,  half  of  them  being  in  Freetown,  the  capital, 
there  are  not  so  many  as  two  hundred  whites. 

The  hardly  less  inhospitable  dibtrict  of  the  Gambia,  also, 
is  only  visited  by  the  few  Englishmen  who  are  required  to 
superintend  and  make  capital  out  of  the  growing  trade 
carried  on  by  the  black  settlers,  numbering  about  14,000, 
with  the  native  tribes,  in  which  European  commodities  are 
exchanged  for  ground-nuts  and  palm-oil. 

The  Gold  Coast,  with  Cape  Coast  Castle  for  its  centre, 
alone  invites  white  residents,  and  these  are  chiefly  mission- 
aries, ".ugmented  by  a  floating  population  of  merchants. 
An  extensive  territory,  peopled  by  nearly  half  a  million 
blacks,  is  kept  under  subjection  to  the  British,  who  have 
gradually  expelled  the  Dutch  and  Danes  who  claimed  to 
have  a  share  in  it ;  and,  a,s  the  name  implies,  the  chief 
attraction  to  Europeans  is  the  gold  here  collected  in  small 
quantities.  Besides  gold  dust,  there  is  commerce  in  palm- 
oil,  gum,  and  ivory,  bartered  chiefly  for  clothing,  rum,  and 
gunpowder. 

A  fourth  and  now  more  hopeful  settlement  is  at  Lagos, 
an  island  in  the  Bight  of  Benin,  the  head-quarters  of  the 
slave-trade  during  two  centuries,  which  became  a  British 


i 


OUR  POSSESSIONS  THERE. 


157 


possession  in  1861.  Its  healthier  climate  renders  it  a  fitter 
dwelling-place  for  Europeans,  though  of  these  there  are 
only  about  a  hundred  among  some  75,000  natives ;  and  it 
offers  advantages  for  trade  in  the  lead  ore,  indigo,  and 
camwood  that  abound  in  the  interior,  and  for  cultivation  of 
cotton  along  the  coast. 

No  other  colonial  possessions  of  England  have  such  an 
unwelcome  liistory  or  offer  bo  few  attractions  to  any  visitors 
but  those  who  find  their  pleasure  in  travel  among  barbarous 
races  and  in  efforts  to  improve  their  state  by  means  of 
Christianity  and  civilization.  In  this  latter  pursuit  there  is 
some  encouragement.  '  After  many  years'  intercourse  with 
the  race,'  said  the  Governor  of  Gambia  in  186G,  '  I  cannot 
see  in  the  African  any  incapacity  for  civilization.  On  the 
contrary,  I  am  convinced  that  the  liberated  Africans  con- 
tain in  themselves  all  the  elements  of  a  commercial 
people. '■**■ 

*  Colonial  Governors'  Reports,  1867,  part  ii.,  p.  17. 


!      i 


; 


i 


l.!.!i 


'  .  .rr-4 


,:,H.l 


mmmsm 


•  i  , 


! 


i  i 

1    ! 
I 


^ 


i    ..  I    '■ 


1    ' 


*  ! 


CHAPTEE  XIV. 

CAPE   COLONY. 

THE  DUTCH  SETTLEMENT  ON  THE  CAPE  OF  GOOD  HOPE — EARLY  QCTARRELS  WITH 
THE  HOTTENTOTS  AND  CRUEL  TREATMENT  OF  THEM — TRANSFER  OF  THE 
COLONY  TO  ENGLAND — ITS  PROGRESS  UNDER  BRITISH  RULE — THE  KAFFIK 
WARS  AND  OTHER  TROUBLES — THE  BOEHS  AND  THE  ORANGE  FREE  STATE — 
OTHER   OFFSHOOTS   OF   THE   COLONY.      [1648-1888.] 

HE  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  called  by  him  the  Cape 
of  Storms,  was  discovered  by  Bartolomeo  Diaz 
the  Portuguese  navigator,  in  1494 ;  and  it  was 
from  this  time  often  visited  by  other  voyagers, 
who  followed  in  the  track  of  Vasco  de  Gama, 
and  sailed  round  the  coast  of  Africa  in  their  search  for  the 
treasures  of  the  East  Indies.  But  its  colonization  was  not 
thought  of  till  a  century  and  a  half  later. 

In  1648  a  Dutch  vessel,  the  Ilaarlcm,  on  its  way  to  India, 
was  wrecked  upon  the  coast.  Its  crew,  forced  to  reside 
thei'c  for  some  months,  sent  home  so  favourable  an  account 
of  the  district,  and  so  strongly  urged  the  advantage  of  a 
settlement  at  which  vessels,  passing  to  and  from  the  East, 
might  halt  and  gain  refreshment,  that  tlieir  suggestion  was 
adopted  by  the  Dutch  East  India  Company.  Seventy  or 
eighty  soldiers,  peasants  and  convicts,  under  Jan  van  Rie- 
beek,  arrived  in  Table  i5ay  in  April,  1G-j2,  and  by  them  a 
wooden  shed  was  erected  on  the  site  of  Cape  Town.  The 
Hottentots,  or  Bushmen,  welcomed  them  ;  and,  amid  many 
difliculties  caused  by  their  appearance  in  the  winter  season, 
when  food  was  scarce  and  wild  beasts  roamed  over  Sihe 


I         :    '! 


J  .: 


\U\ 


if* 


•1 

■.^f 

1        : 

?! 

1 

i\ 

1 

i-'«^ 

1 

M 

1; 

f. 

1      '; 

■I 
i 

I 

i'i 
m. 


di 
fri 
ai 


ot 

th 

m 
'i 
ini 
be 
ca 
an 

Oti 

to 
ho 
de 
m( 
frc 
ge 
we 
thi 
Al 
bu 
me 
H< 
wi 
pu 


i! 


')!     '      1 


be 
Di 

the 
the 
gre 

tot 
't\ 
afti 


I     ! 


4    ■ 


FIRST  VISITORS  TO  THE  CAPE. 


159 


district,  a  little  colony  was  formed,  which,  augmented  by 
fresh  arrivals  from  Holland,  numbered  in  1658  three  hundred 
and  sixty  persons. 

The  first   difficulties,  however,  were   soon   followed  by 

others  of  the  colonists'  own  making.     With   the  jiatives 

they  were  at  first  well  pleased  ;  but  very  soon  they  claimed 

more  from  them  than  they  cared  to  give,  and  the  first 

*  insolence,'  as  it  was  termed,  was  fiercely  resented.     The 

insolence  was  in  the  same  sort  of  cattle-lifting  which  has 

been  a  source  of  trouble  ever  since.     Van  Eiebeek,  having 

caught  a  man  in  this  act,  questioned  him  as  to  his  motive, 

and  was  told  by  him,  as  he  reported,  *  that  it  was  for  no 

other  reason  than  because  they  saw  we  were  breaking  up 

the  best  land  and  grass  where  their  cattle  were  accustomed 

to  graze,  trying  to  establish  ourselves   everywhere,  with 

houses  and  farms,  as  if  we  were  never  more  to  move,  but 

designed  to  take  up  our  permanent  occupation  more  and 

more  of  this  Cape  Colony,  which  had  belonged  to  them 

from  time  immemorial — ay,  so  that  their  cattle  could  not 

get  at  the  water  without  passing  over  the  corn-land,  which 

we  would  not  allow  them  to  do.'     Van  Eiebeek  considered 

that  cattle-stealing  was  *  a  matter  most  displeasing  to  the 

Almighty  when  committed  by  such  men  as  they  were ;' 

but  saw  no  harm  in  the  land-stealing  resorted  to  by  such 

men  as  he.     Therefore  in  1659  he  made  war  upon  the 

Hottentots  with  a  hundred  and  thirty  of  his  colonists  ;  and 

with  the  help  of  some  bloodshed  and  '  a  little   torture,' 

punished  them  for  their  iniquity. 

That  first  quarrel  was  the  parent  of  others  that  need  not 
be  detailed.  The  colony  grew  steadily  but  not  rapidly. 
Dutch  farmers  ploughed  the  land  and  sowed  and  reaped 
the  wheat  which  it  yielded  in  abundance,  and,  in  spite  of 
the  frequent  depredations  of  the  natives,  made  profit  out  of 
great  herds  of  sheep  and  cows  ;  and  gradually  the  Hotten- 
tots were  driven  farther  and  farther  inland,  away  from 
'  their  birthplace  and  their  own  land,  full  of  pure  water, 
after  which  their  hearts  longed,'  as  they  said  in  one  of  their 


i  i  ( 


1 60 


CAPE  COLONY. 


I  i'.il 


I  1 


.'  t 


;m 


I  I 


complaints  against  the  encroachments  of  the  colonists.  In 
1759,  a  century  and  a  quarter  after  it  was  started,  the  Cape 
settlement  contained  9,782  inhabitants  cf  European  origin, 
among  whom  only  1,486  were  women,  and  8,104  Hottentot 
slaves. 

Of  the  way  in  which  these  slaves  were  caught  and  treated 
a  precise  account  is  given  by  a  Dutch  traveller  who  resided 
in  the  colony  between  1772  and  1776.  '  Several  persons 
that  are  in  want  of  servants  join  together  and  take  a 
journey  to  that  part  of  the  country  where  the  Bushmen 
live.  They  endeavour  to  spy  out  where  the  Bushmen  have 
their  haunts.  They  are  found  in  societies  from  ten  to  fifty 
or  a  hundred,  reckoning  old  and  young  together.  On  a 
dark  night  the  farmers  set  themselves  on  them,  stationing 
themselves  at  some  distance  about  the  kraal.  They  then 
give  the  alarm  by  firing  a  gun  or  two.  By  this  means  there 
is  such  a  consternation  spread  over  the  whole  body  of  these 
savages  that  only  the  most  bold  and  intelligent  among  them 
have  the  courage  to  break  through  the  circle  and  steal  oE 
These  the  captors  are  glad  enough  to  get  rid  of  in  so  easy 
a  manner ;  those  that  are  stupid  and  timorous,  and  allow 
themselves  to  be  carried  into  bondage,  best  answering  their 
purpose.  If  a  colonist  at  any  time  gets  sight  of  a  Bushman, 
he  fires  immediately,  and  spirits  up  his  horses  and  dogs  in 
order  to  hunt  him,  with  more  ardour  and  fury  than  he 
would  a  wolf  or  any  other  wild  beast.  The  slave  business 
is  exercised  by  the  colonist  towards  the  nation  of  Bushmen 
with  a  cruelty  which  merits  the  abhorrence  of  everyone, 
though  I  have  been  told  that  they  pride  themselves  in  it ; 
and  not  only  is  the  capture  of  a  Hottentot  considered  by 
them  as  a  work  of  pie  >ure,  but  in  cold  blood  they  destroy 
the  bonds  which  nature  has  knit  between  husband  and  wife, 
and  between  parents  and  children.  I  have  known  some 
colonists  not  only,  for  a  trifling  neglect,  deliberately  flay 
both  the  backs  and  limbs  of  their  slaves  by  a  peculiar, 
slow,  lingering  process,  but  even,  outdoing  the  very  tigers 
in  cruelty,  throw  pepper  and  salt  over  the  wounds.    Many 


ii 


m, 


ny 


THE  DUTCH  AXD  THE  HOTTENTOTS. 


i6i 


a  time  have  I  seen  unhappy  skives,  v^^ho,  with  the  most 
dismal  cries  and  lamentations,  were  suffering  such  punish- 
ments, during  which  they  are  used  to  cry,  not  so  much  for 
mercy  as  for  a  draught  of  water ;  but,  so  long  as  their  blood 
is  inllamed  with  the  torture,  it  is  said  that  great  care  must 
be  taken  to  avoid  allowing  them  drink  of  any  kind,  as 
experience  has  shown  that  in  that  case  they  would  die  in  a 
few  hours,  and  sometimes  the  very  instant  after  they  drank 
it.  I  am  far  from  accusing  all  the  colonists  of  having  a  hand 
in  these  and  other  cruelties.  There  are  many  who  hold 
them  in  abomination,  and  fear  lest  the  vengeance  of  Heaven 
should,  for  all  these  crimes,  fall  upon  their  land  and  their 
posterity.  Government  has  no  other  part  in  the  cruelties 
exercised  by  its  subjects  than  that  of  taking  no  cognizance 
of  them.'* 

Perhaps,  however,  that  was  part  enough.  It  was  thought 
well  to  suffer  the  Hottentots  to  be  exterminated,  in  order 
that  the  colony  might  be  free  from  their  wicked  cattle- 
stealing  ;  and  if,  while  that  was  being  done,  some  of  them 
could  be  put  to  use  as  slaves,  their  masters  must  be  respon- 
sible to  a  higher  power  than  man's  for  any  harshness  that 
occurred  in  the  work.  So  the  Dutch  farmers  led  on  their 
lazy  life,  in  which  the  only  excitement  was  in  hunting  and 
torturing  the  Hottentots,  and  their  numbers  were  slowly 
increased  and  their  territories  rapidly  extended,  until  1795, 
when.  Napoleon  Bonaparte  having  invaded  and  annexed 
Holland,  its  settlement  at  the  Cape  w^as  assigned  to  England 
by  the  Prince  of  Orange,  then  a  refugee  in  London.  In 
1797,  when  the  Earl  of  Macartney  went  out  as  Governor, 
he  found  a  district  of  about  120,000  square  miles,  more 
than  twice  the  size  of  England,  peopled  by  about  20,000 
white  men,  with  their  slaves,  and  an  abject  race  of  savages 
in  the  interior.  Little  but  confusion  prevailed,  however, 
the  Dutch  residents  rebelling  against  their  new  masters  and 
wreaking  vengeance  upon  their  black  subjects,  until  1803, 

*  Spurrman,  'Voyage  to  the  Cape  of  Goo:'  Hope,'  vol.  i.,  pp.  53,  202  ; 
vol.  ii.,  pp.  143,  342. 

11 


ii'l; 


f 


l62 


CAPK  COLONY. 


Ml 

lii 
i  - ' 


;; 


1     ■      I 


1  !, 


:'    1 


1     ! 


when,  by  the  Treaty  of  Amiens,  the  colony  was  restored  to 
Holland.  Soon  after  that,  the  European  war  having  been 
revived,  the  British  Government  seized  the  district  by  force 
of  arms.  Cape  Town,  after  a  gallant  fight,  surrendered  to 
Sir  David  Baird  in  1806,  and  military  rule  was  in  force, 
being  chiefly  directed  against  the  sterner  Kaffirs  who  had 
advanced  from  the  interior  to  take  the  place  of  the  almost 
exterminated  Hottentots,  until  1815,  when  the  colony  was 
formally  and  finally  ceded  to  Great  Britain. 

There  was  mismanagement  on  the  part  of  the  new  owners 
of  the  colony,  although  their  chief  troubles  sprang  from  a 
worthy  action.  In  1808  the  making  of  fresh  slaves  was 
forbidden,  and  laws  began  to  be  enforced  for  improving  the 
condition  of  those  already  on  the  farms.  The  white  inhabi- 
tants would  have  cared  little  whether  they  were  nominally 
subject  to  England  or  to  Holland,  but  this  novel  interference 
with  their  privileges  as  slaveholders  was  indignantly  re- 
sented by  them.  Thus  a  keen  spirit  of  opposition  to  their 
new  rulers  was  aroused,  and  much  mischief  sprang  from  it. 
The  boons  at  first  conferred  upon  the  subject  Hottentots 
were  too  small  to  win  from  them  any  gratitude;  and  no 
attempts  at  all  were  made  to  pacify  the  few  Hottentots  who 
yet  remained  in  freedom,  and  the  hordes  of  Kaffirs  in  their 
rear. 

These  Kaffirs,  residing  in  the  eastern  part  of  South  Africa, 
had  come  into  contact  with  the  European  settlers,  partly 
through  their  own  encroachments  upon  the  districts  held  by 
the  now  almost  exterminated  Hottentots,  partly  through  the 
advances  made  by  the  Europeans  within  their  own  border- 
lands. It  seems  as  though  the  new  Government  of  the 
English  might  easily  have  made  peace  with  them.  Better 
able  to  fight  than  the  Hottentots,  they  were  less  disposed  to 
do  so,  having  fewer  grudges  against  the  white  man.  '  Some,' 
we  are  told,  'harassed  the  border  colonists  by  frequent 
predatory  incursions;  but  a  considerable  number  lived 
quietly,  engaged  in  cultivating  the  ground  and  herding  their 
cattle,  and  these,  together  with  another  class  who  had 


UNDER  ENGLISH  RULE. 


163 


the 
kter 
Id  to 
ne, 
lent 
tved 
(heir 
Ihad 


entered  the  service  of  the  colonists  at  their  request,  would 
gladly  have  pledged  their  allegiance  to  the  British  Crown, 
had  the  privileges  of  British  subjects  been  offered  and  duly 
explained  to  them  in  return.     The  chiefs  were  daily  becom- 
ing more  sensible  of  the  advantages  to  be  gained  by  civiliza- 
tion, and  entreated  that  missionaries  should  be  sent  for  the 
instruction  of  their  'young  people.     Under  these  circum- 
stances there  is  little  doubt  a  large  body  of  Kaffirs  might,  by 
legalising  their  tenure  of  certain  lands,  and  otherwise  by 
judicious    treatment,    have    been    incorporated    with   and 
rendered  useful  members  of  the  community.     Others  might 
have  been  bought  out  with  far  less  expense  than  they  could 
be  driven  out ;  and  the  really  irreclaimable,  when  proved  so, 
expelled  with  the  consent  of  the  chief  and  council  of  the 
sub-tribes  to  which  they  belonged.'* 

Unfortunately  this  wise  and  honourable  line  of  conduct  was 
not  thought  of.     The  English,  finding  that  the  Kaffirs  were 
the  enemies  of  the  Dutch,  made  them  their  own  enemies — 
*  irreclaimable,  barbarous,  and  perpetual  enemies,'  as  they 
were  described  in  a  proclamation  issued  at  this  time.     In 
1809  Colonel  Collins,  who  had  been  employed  as  a  commis- 
sioner for  the  settlement  of  the  frontier,  recommended  the 
expulsion  of  all  Kaffirs  from  the  border,  and  even  the  dis- 
missal of  all  who  had  become  servants  in  the  colony.     In 
1811  this  was  begun.     *  A  great  commando,  comprising  a 
large  force  of  military  and  burgher  militia,  w^as  assembled 
under  Colonel  Graham ;  and,  though  the  Kaffirs  earnestly 
pleaded  the  cruelty  of  including  the  innocent  and  the  guilty 
in  the  same  condemnation,  all  were  expelled  with  unrelenting 
severity.     No  warning  was  given ;  but  they  were  forced  to 
abandon  their  crops  of  maize  and  millet,  then  nearly  ripe, 
and  so  extensive  that  the  troops  were  employed  for  many 
weeks  in  destroying  their  cultivations  by  trampling  them 
down  with  large  herds  of  cattle,  and  burning  to  the  ground 
their  huts  and  hamlets ;   and  much  longer  time  elapsed 
before  they  succeeded  in  driving  the  whole  of  the  people,  to 


;:  ! 


Si 


*  Martin,  vol.  iv.,  p.  50. 


11—2 


1 64 


CAPE  COLONY. 


i  1  ?J  , 


M!  I 


'            I      ■        t 

•    '     1    '      ' 

[|1      l! 

jj  1  "1 

tho  immbor  of  20,000  souls,  over  the  Great  Fish  River.'* 
No  heed  was  paid  to  the  pathetic  appeals  of  these  poor  out- 
casts. '  We  have  been  with  you  fifteen  or  twenty  years,' 
said  some  of  them,  as  we  are  told  by  one  who  was  present, 
'  We  are  your  friends.  We  have  watched  your  cattle  when 
they  were  taken  away  by  our  countrymen.  We  have 
followed  them  and  brought  them  back  to  you.  Our  wives 
have  cultivated  your  gardens.  Our  children  and  yours 
speak  the  same  language.'  I 

Not  satisfied  with  expelling  the  Kafiirs  from  the  colony, 
of  which  the  Great  Fish  River  was  at  that  time  considered 
the  boundary,  the  colonial  troops  crossed  the  river,  pursuing 
the  fugitives  on  the  other  siae,  and  attacked  the  friendly 
tribes  among  whom  they  took  refuge.  The  land-drost,  or 
magistrate  and  overseer  of  the  district,  Mr.  Stockenstrom, 
wlio  had  often  befriended  the  natives,  now  sought  to  pre- 
Vv.nt  bloodshed.  '  He  was  proceeding  across  the  mountains, 
accompanied  by  about  forty  men,  when,  on  approaching  one 
of  the  kloofs,  or  passes,  of  the  White  River,  he  beheld 
numerous  bands  of  Kaffirs  assembling  on  both  sides  of  the 
narrow  ridge  connecting  two  arms  of  the  great  mountain- 
chain  along  which  lay  their  path.  Relying  on  his  great 
personal  influence,  and  hoping  to  induce  the  Kaffirs  to  leave 
the  country  without  further  hostile  operations,  he  rode 
straight  up  to  them  and  dismounted  in  the  midst,  followed 
by  a  few  who,  having  vainly  striven  to  dissuade  their  leader 
from  his  daring  enterprise,  determined  to  share  whatever 
hazard  he  might  incur.  The  conference  began,  and  con- 
tinued for  some  time  in  the  most  amicable  manner.  The 
chiefs  and  their  counsellers  gathered  round  the  venerable 
magistrate  and  listened  with  deference  to  his  arguments, 
until  a  messenger  arrived  with  the  intelligence  that  the  right 
and  centre  divisions  of  the  British  troops  had  attacked  the 
Kaffirs,  some  of  whose  principal  men  had  already  fallen. 
The  hope  of  striking  a  decisive  blow  by  the  destruction  of  a 

*  Martin,  vol.  iv.,  p.  51. 

t  Parliamentary  jPapers  relative  to  the  Cape,  1835,  part  i.,  p.  176. 


tight 
the 

lieu. 
of  a 


THE  FIRST  KAFFIR  WAR, 


165 


leader  so  powerful  as  the  land-drost,  combined  peihapawitli 
tlie  desire  for  retaliation,  was  in-CKistible.  A  Boer,  standing 
close  by  Mr.  Stockenstroni,  remarked  to  liim  the  agitated 
discussion  whicli  had  suddenly  arisen  among  a  party  of 
Kafllrs  who  stood  aloof  in  tlio  tl ticket,  but  he  replied,  with  a 
smile,  that  there  was  no  danger.  While  yet  speaking,  his 
words  received  a  fearful  contradiction.  The  Kalhr  war- 
whoop  rent  the  air,  and  was  re-echoed  by  barbarian  voices 
from  hill  and  dale  for  many  miles  around.  In  a  brief  space 
the  land-drost  and  fourteen  of  his  companions  lay  dead, 
pierced  by  innumc^rable  woun.  s.  The  survivors,  of  whom 
several  were  wounded,  availed  themselves  of  thefleetness  of 
their  horses  to  escape  along  the  mountain  ridge  to  the 
camp.'*  The  only  effect  of  that  conduct  towards  one  of  the 
few  European  friends  of  the  Kaffirs  was  increased  severity 
in  the  unholy  exploits  of  the  English.  '  The  Kafhrs,'  said 
one  who  served  in  the  affair,  *  were  shot  indiscriminately, 
women  as  well  as  men,  and  even  though  they  offered  no  re- 
sistance ;'  but  he  adds,  by  way  of  apology,  that  *  the  women 
were  killed  unintentionally,  because  the  Boers  could  not  dis- 
tinguish them  from  men  among  the  bushes. 'f  The  murderous 
work  continued  till  the  Kaffirs  were  forced  to  retire ;  but 
four  years  elapsed  before  the  district  seized  from  them  could 
be  safe  without  the  presence  of  armed  militia.  Then  the 
fort  ereqjbed  thereon  was  named  Graham's  Tovv-n,  in  honour 
— if  it  was  any  honour — of  Colonel  Graham,  the  officer  who 
had  commanded  in  the  work. 

In  such  ways  the  English  brought  upon  themselves  the 
deadly  hatred  of  the  Kaffirs.  No  less  mischief  sprang 
from  their  ways  of  making  friends  among  the  black  races. 
A  leader  of  one  of  their  tribes,  naimed  Gaika,  being  at  feud 
with  other  chiefs,  was  in  1817  made  an  ally  by  the  governor, 
Lord  Charles  Somerset ;  and  it  was  agreed  between  them 
that  Gaika  and  his  people  should  have  exclusive  right  of 
trade  with  the  English,  and  should  be  aided  in  war  against 

*  ISIartin,  vol.  iv.,  p.  52. 

t  PringK  ,  'Narrative  of  a  Kesiidt-ncL-  in  South  Africa,' p.  291. 


'"! 


>! 


I66 


CAPE  COLONY, 


i:  '  ,' 


1.!'    I 


I   '    1 


I     i  I   I 


n  i 


!    i  '  .! 


i    !    I 


i     ,       I 


ii  " 

L.'i   i, 


'11; 


,:  » 


his  rivals,  on  condition  of  their  helping  to  punish  those 
rivals  for  their  misdeeds.  One  curious  provision  in  tliis 
treaty  was  that,  whenever  cattle  were  stolen  from  the 
colony,  the  colonists  should  sei/c  an  equivalent  number  from 
the  nearest  and  most  convenient  kraal,  or  villa<^e,  of  the 
Kaflirs,  and  that  Gaika  should  make  ^ood  the  loss,  if  it  foil 
upon  his  own  tribe,  by  seizure  from  some  of  his  neighbours. 
Certainly  the  Cape  colonists  were  more  apt  in  learning  tlic 
crafts  of  barbarism  from  the  natives  than  in  teaching  tlu)m 
the  arts  of  civilization.  Hardly  could  a  more  effective  plan 
have  been  devised  for  encouraging  ill-will  and  perpetuating 
the  trade  of  cattle-stealing,  which  was  now  tho  favourite 
excuse  for  raids  upon  tlic  Kaffirs,  as  it  had  been  before  iu 
the  case  of  tho  Hottentots. 

In  accordance  with  this  treaty,  Gaika,  who  had  been 
defeated  in  a  battle  with  his  enemies,  was  in  1818  aided 
with  a  force  of  3,352  soldiers  and  armed  colonists,  who  went 
against  a  league  of  several  Kaffir  tribes.  These  Kaffirs 
expostulated  against  the  intrusion,  alleging  that  they  had 
done  no  harm  to  the  European  towns,  and  wished  to  be  at 
peace  with  them,  and  claiming  that  they  should  be  allowed 
to  settle  their  own  quarrels  amongst  themselves.  The 
answer  of  the  English  was  a  march  through  the  territories 
of  the  associated  tribes,  whose  members,  not  daring  to 
engage  in  open  fight,  were  slaughtered  in  their  villages,  or 
forced  to  take  refuge  iu  the  woods  while  the  villages  were 
destroyed.  The  gains  of  this  inglorious  exploit  were  30,000 
stolen  cattle,  of  which  9,000  were  given  to  Gaika,  the  rest 
being  distributed  among  the  colonists.  The  associated 
tribes,  goaded  by  famine,  sought  to  revenge  themselves  by 
raids  on  the  English  borders,  wliereby  much  injury  was 
done.  Of  their  number  9,000  attacked  Graham's  Town,  but 
its  garrison  of  350,  and  a  corps  of  Hottentots,  used  their 
muskets  with  such  deadly  effect  that  the  Kaffirs  were  soon 
put  to  flight,  1,400  of  them  being  killed  in  the  fight,  and 
many  others  dying  on  the  way  back  to  their  kraals.  Thither 
they  were  pursued,  to  be  further  cruelly  punished  for  their 


THE  SECOND  KAEEIR  WAR. 


167 


honest  resistanco  of  English  tyranny.  About  10,000  natives 
wore  driven  from  their  liomes,  and  a  now  province  was 
added  to  Cape  Colony.  To  this  eastern  province,  with  Port 
EHzabeth  for  its  chief  town,  a  large  number  of  English 
colonists  were  imported  in  1820,  and  thus  a  community  dis- 
tinct from  the  old  Dutch  settlement  was  established. 

It  is  well  that  wo  should  understand  the  disgraceful  way 
in  which  the  English  quarrel  with  the  Kaffirs  was  begun 
and  continued  ;  but  it  is  not  necessary  hero  to  set  forth  all 
the  painful  incidents  of  the  strife,  perhaps  the  most  disgrace- 
ful in  the  annals  of  English  colonial  policy,  too  often  dis- 
honourable in  itself  and  unfortunate  in  its  issues.  The 
slender  excuse  for  the  treatment  to  which  the  Kaffirs  were 
subjected  is  that  England  had  to  govern  a  colony,  chiefly 
composed  of  foreigners,  whoso  disaffection  to  the  new  rule 
set  over  them  was  only  to  be  checked  by  humouring  the  evil 
passions  to  which  they  had  long  given  free  vent. 

To  make  willing  vassals  of  the  Dutch  farmers  was  a  hard 
task.  In  1815  an  insurrection  broke  out  among  them,  which 
was  with  difficulty  quelled,  and  then  many  of  the  old  settlers 
only  submitted  to  English  government  with  a  sullen  discon- 
tent that  was  very  injurious  to  the  well-being  of  the  colony. 
Quiet  was  not  easily  maintained,  and  a  healthy  honourable 
temper  could  in  no  way  be  produced.  Every  effort  to  do 
good  was  a  fresh  cause  of  opposition.  So  it  was  especially 
in  1828,  when  a  wise  law  for  protecting  the  Hottentots  and 
virtually  abolishing  slavery  was  passed. 

In  1834  and  1835  another  cruel  war  was  waged  against 
the  KaiTrs,  among  whom  Gaika,  the  former  favourite  of 
the  colonists,  was  now  included.  Some  30,000  of  them 
'  rebelled  '  against  British  rule,  and  were,  at  first,  so  success- 
ful that  they  found  their  way  up  to  the  suburbs  of  Cape 
Town.  They  were  soon  driven  back.  '  Their  loss  during 
our  operations  against  them,'  wrote  the  governor.  Sir  Benja- 
min d'Urban,  to  Lord  Glenelg,  then  Colonial  Secretary, 
'  has  amounted  to  4,000  of  their  warriors,  and,  among  them, 
many  captains.     Ours,  fortunately,  has  not  in  t.ie  whole 


,10 


m   < 


■•mmm 


mmt 


■I 


1 68 


CAPE  COLONY. 


■  V  . 

6 

i       '      i. 

1 

•      ) 

it '  I 


'ii 


amounted  to  100,  and  of  them  only  two  officers.  There  have 
been  taken  from  them,  also,  besides  the  conquest  and  aliena- 
tion of  their  country,  about  60,000  head  of  cattle,  and  almost 
all  their  goats  ;  their  habitations  everywhere  destroyed,  and 
their  gardens  and  cornfields  laid  waste.  They  have  been 
therefore  chastised,  not  extremely,  but  perhaps  sufficiently.'* 
'  The  enemy,'  wrote  Colonel — afterwards  Sir  Harry — Smith, 
concerning  one  part  of  the  '  not  extreme  '  chastisement, 
'  although  his  traces  were  numerous,  fled  so  rapidly  that  few 
were  killed,  and  only  three  shots  fired  at  the  troops.  The 
whole  of  the  country  has  becm  most  thoroughly  traversed. 
Upwards  of  1,200  huts,  new  and  old,  have  been  burnt ; 
immense  stores  of  corn,  in  every  direction,  destroyed.  Cattle 
of  all  sorts,  horses  and  goats,  have  fallen  into  our  hands. 
It  is  most  gratifying  to  know  that  the  savages,  being  the  un- 
provoked aggressors,  have  brought  down  all  the  misery  witli 
which  they  are  now  visited  upon  the  heads  of  themselves 
and  their  families,  and  that  the  great  day  of  retribution,  and 
the  punishment  of  the  unprovoked  atrocities  committed  by 
these  murderous  savages  on  our  colonists,  had  arrived. 't 

The  language  in  which  Lord  Glenelg  condemned  these 
proceedings  and  the  satisfaction  with  which  they  were 
regarded  by  their  authors,  was  creditable  to  him.  *  I  must 
own,'  he  wrote,  'that  I  am  affected  by  these  statements  in 
a  manner  the  most  remote  from  that  which  the  writer  con- 
templated. In  the  civilized  warfare  of  Europe  this  desola- 
tion of  an  enemy's  country,  not  in  aid  of  any  military  opera- 
tions, nor  for  the  security  of  ihe  invading  force,  but  simply 
and  confessedly  as  an  act  of  vengeance,  lias  rarely  occurred, 
and  the  occurrence  of  it  has  been  invariably  followed  by 
universal  reprobation.  I  doubt,  indeed,  whether  the  history 
of  modern  Europe  affords  an  example  even  of  a  single  case 
in  which,  without  some  better  pretext  than  that  of  nere 
retribution,  any  invaded  people  were  ever  subjected  to  the 
calamities  which  Colonel  Smith  here  describes — the  loss  of 
their  food,  the  spoiling  of  their  cattle,  the  burning  of  their 
*  Parliamentary  Papers,  May,  1836,  p.  89.  f  JInd.,  p.  69. 


ih' 


THE  THIRD  KAFFIR  WAR. 


169 


17 


111' 


dwellings,  the  expulsion  of  their  wives  and  families  from 
their  homes,  the  confiscation  of  their  property,  and  the 
forfeiture  of  their  native  country.  I  am,  of  course,  aware 
that  the  laws  of  civili/cd  nations  cannot  he  rigidly  applied 
in  our  contests  with  barbarous  men  ;  for  those  Jaws  pre- 
suppose a  reciprocity  which  cannot  subsist  between  parties 
of  whom  the  one  is  ignorant  of  the  usages,  maxims,  and 
religion  of  the  other.  But  the  great  prii;ciples  of  morality 
are  of  immutable  and  universal  obligation,  and  from  them 
are  deduced  the  laws  of  war.  Of  these  laws  the  first  and 
cardinal  is,  that  the  belligerent  nuist  inflict  no  injury  on  his 
enemy  which  is  not  indispensably  re(iuisite  to  ensure  the 
rights  of  him  by  wdiom  it  is  inflicted,  or  to  promote  the 
attainment  of  the  legitimate  ends  of  the  warfare.  Whether 
we  contend  with  a  civilized  or  a  barbarous  enemy,  the 
gratuitous  aggravation  of  the  horrors  of  war,  on  the  plea  of 
vengeance  or  retribution,  or  on  any  similar  grounds,  is  alike 
indefensible.  Now  I  must  confess  my  inability  to  discover 
what  danger  could  be  averted,  or  what  useful  object 
could  be  attained,  by  the  desolation  of  the  Kaffir  country.'* 

By  Lord  Gleuelg's  instructions,  the  laud  seized  and  the 
property  stolen  from  the  Kaffirs  were  restored  in  1836,  and 
thus  a  slight  recompense  was  made  for  the  wanton  injuries 
inflicted  upon  tliem.  Lord  Glenelg  also  introduced  a  new 
system  of  dealing  with  the  Kaffirs,  which,  if  they  had  not 
been  already  so  deeply  injured  by  English  rule,  might  have 
been  altogether  beneficial,  and  which,  as  it  was,  led  to  very 
good  results.  Treaties  were  entered  into  with  most  of  their 
chiefs,  by  which  trade  was  encouraged,  and  their  territories 
wei-e  reserved  to  them  without  interference,  on  the  condition 
of  their  i-espectiug  the  riglits  which  the  Europeans  had 
hitlierto  acquired  by  conquest.  Thereby  peace  was  kept, 
and  the  colony  improved  rapidly  during  ten  years. 

In  spite  of  misrule,  its  progress  had  been  considerable 
ever  sinco  tlie  establishment  of  British  dominion.  In  1773 
there  were  less  than  2'i,000  white,  black,  and  coloured 
*   I'arliiunentary  I'apcrs,  May,  1830,  p.  70. 


'  i-         li 


1, 


I70 


CAPE  COLONY. 


1 1 


M   '^ 


S  M    '    > 


ii 


I    1 


;  ) 


residents  in  the  Cape  Colony.  In  1807  they  amounted  to 
56,051 ;  in  1817  to  74,099 ;  in  1823  to  85,656 ;  in  1833  to 
129,713 ;  and  in  1836  to  150,110.  In  1846  they  numbered 
285,279,  having  nearly  doubled  in  ten  years.  In  the  ensuing 
twenty  years  the  population  was  again  doubled.  In  1865 
there  were  566,158  inhabitants  in  the  colony,  of  whom 
204,859  were  Europeans. 

This  rapid  growth  of  population  was  not  due  solely  to  the 
establishment  of  better  relations  with  the  Kaffir  tribes,  to 
the  improved  trade  that  resulted  therefrom,  and  to  the 
extension  of  territory.  It  was  also  partly  caused  by  the 
abolition  of  slavery.  In  1834  freedom  was  given  to  29,120 
slaves,  who,  as  free  men,  became  better  servants  and  made 
the  farms  more  profitable.  The  kinder  treatment  to  which 
they  were  subjected,  moreover,  not  only  enabled  the  resident 
black  population  to  multiply  rapidly,  but  caused  a  further 
increase  of  its  numbers  by  the  settlement  in  the  colony  of 
Kaffirs  and  Hottentots,  who,  now  that  the  tyranny  of  slavery 
was  at  an  end,  gladly  sought  employment  and  civilization 
under  f'e  English  planters  and  traders. 

In  ^  46,  however,  there  was  another  dismal  Kaffir  war. 
It  began  through  the  arbitrary  behaviour  of  the  Cape  Town 
authorities  towards  the  natives  in  abolishing  some  of  the 
treaties  made  with  them.  Cattle-stealing  was  increased, 
and  disputes  about  boundaries  were  revived.  Kaffir 
*  insolence,'  as  it  was  called,  showed  itself  in  various  ways ; 
and  this,  being  resented  by  the  colonial  authorities  and  by 
the  war-party  among  the  colonists,  which  had  lately  been 
kept  under,  led  to  a  renewal  of  hostihties.  In  April,  1846, 
the  Kaffir  territory  was  invaded  by  a  small  force,  and  this 
movement  being  to  a  great  extent  unsuccessful,  the  blacks 
were  led  to  retaliate.  The  old  vindictive  strife,  disgraceful 
to  England,  began  again,  and  it  was  continued  with 
intermissions  till  1853.  Its  details  need  not  here  be  given. 
One  little  incident  will  suffice  to  illustrate  the  temper  in 
which  it  was  carried  on  by  English  officers  and  gentlemen. 
Sir  Harry  Smith,  who  had  promised  the  Duke  of  Wellington 


I     i 


THE  FOURTH  KAFFHi  WAR. 


171 


that,  with  4,000  troops,  he  would  utterly  subdue  the  Kaffirs 
in  two  or  three  weeks,  was  sent  out  as  governor  in  1847. 
On  landing  at  Port  Elizabeth,  he  was  welcomed  by  all 
classes,  the  war-party  hoping  that  he  would  further  its 
objects,  the  mor>)  peaceable  section,  including  a  vast  number 
of  native  settlers,  trusting  that  he  would  further  the  ends  of 
justice  in  honourable  ways.  Among  the  crowd  who  came 
to  greet  him  was  Macomo,  formerly  a  great  independent 
chieftain^  now  a  willing  subject  of  the  English  Crown. 
'  Sir  Harry  recognised  him,  half  drew  his  sword  from  his 
scabbard,  shook  it  at  him,  and  stamped  his  foot  on  the 
ground.  Shortly  after  he  sent  for  the  chief,  who,  upon 
being  introduced,  extended  his  hand ;  in  return  for  which 
his  excellency  gave  him  his  foot,  collared  him,  laid  him 
prostrate,  put  his  -oot  upon  his  neck,  and  then  brandished 
his  sword  over  his  head.  Macomo,  on  rising,  looked  the 
governor  qu:etly  in  the  face,  and  said,  *  I  always  thought 
you  a  great  man  till  this  day.'  "* 

By  policy  of  that  sort  the  British  possessions  in  South 
Africa  were  increased,  but  injury  was  done  to  the  progress 
of  civilization,  which  no  territorial  gains  or  multiplying  of 
subject  races  could  compensate. 

The  spread  of  dominion,  and  the  attendant  complications, 
it  should  be  noted,  were  largely  promoted  by  the  fact 
that  the  English,  taking  possession  of  the  colony  after  it 
had  been  under  the  Dutch  for  a  century  and  a  half,  had 
to  deal  not  only  with  the  subject  Hottentots  and 
Bushmen  and  with  the  defiant  Kaffirs,  but  also  with  the 
turbulent  descendants  of  the  original  settlers.  Almost 
from  the  first,  many  of  these,  generally  known  as  Boers, 
objecting  to  the  rule  imposed  on  them  in  and  around 
Cape  Town,  wandered  with  their  servants  and  their  cattle 
into  the  interior,  where  they  set  up  little  communities 
which  were  practically  free  "'om  English  interference, 
and  carried  on  their  own  quarrels  with  the  natives, 
until  it  was  deemed  or  found  necessary  for  the  Cape  Town 

*  Martin,  vol.  iv.,  p.  100. 


i    |>u 


0 

W 
33 


\ 

■•I 


172 


CAPE  COLONY. 


A 


governors  to  assert  their  authority  over  both  Boers  and 
Kaffirs,  sometimes  taking  the  side  of  one  against  the  other, 
and  sometimes  attacking  or  being  attacke..  by  both 
together. 

'  Trekking,'  as  it  was  called,  had  been  the  chief  cause  of 
the  growth  of  Cape  Colony  before  the  English  occupation, 
and  it  was  afterwards  continued  on  a  larger  scale.  Most 
of  the  Dutch  or  Boers  being  farmers,  they  had  constant 
inducements  to  '  trek,'  apart  from  any  reasonable  or 
unreasonable  objections  they  might  have  to  Government 
control.  Each  farmer  required  a  space  of  from  five  to 
ten  thousand  acres  over  which  to  pasture  his  flocks  and 
herds,  and  as  sons  grew  up  and  wanted  farms  of  their 
own,  they  went  out,  generally  in  parties,  in  search  of  them. 
Thus  there  was  an  endless  series  of  encroachments  on  the 
ground  previously  occupied  by  the  Kaffirs,  whom  it  was 
easy,  or  not  unpleasantly  difficult,  to  enslave  or  exterminate. 
The  arrangement,  at  best,  could  hardly  be"  defended  on 
moral  grounds.  It  often  worked  in  ways  wholly  indefen- 
sible. After  commenting  on  the  mischief  done  by  regular 
traders  in  selling  ^;unpowder  to  the  natives.  Colonel  Wade 
said,  in  1825 : '  Besides  these,  there  are  also  the  farmers,  who, 
in  defiance  of  the  law  and  the  severity  of  its  penalties, 
migrate  beyond  the  boundaries,  and  at  the  same  time  that 
they  supply  the  natives  with  the  means  of  desolating  the 
colony,  unfortunately  furnish  them  also  with  something 
of  a  reasonable  pretext  for  doing  so,  by  dispossessing  the 
weak  and  unarmed,  and  occupying  all  the  fertile  spots  and 
springs ;  and,  it  is  asserted  upon  good  authority,  not 
unfrequently  disgracing  themselves  by  atrocities  hardly 
less  barbarous  than  those  which  the  banditti  inflict  within 
the  settlement.'  *  In  the  country  between  the  frontier  line 
and  the  Upper  Orange  Biver,  and  between  the  latter  and 
the  Calcdon  River,  there  are,  at  this  moment,  upwards  of  a 
hundred  heads  of  families,  with  their  slaves,  thus  situated, 
having  seized  upon  tbt-  di':i;,-ict  best  suited  to  them,  without 


any  regard  to  the 


i/nt  oi 


p'''0|;.;rty  of  the  natives  ;  and  it 


THE  BOERS  AND  ORANGE  FREE  STATE.      173 

cMunot   tlierefoi'o  be  a   matter  of  surprise  that  the  latter 
slioiild  seuk  to  retaUate.'-'' 

The  Slave  Emancipation  Act  of  1834 — when  there  were 
about  35,000  slaves  in  the  colony,  with  a  compensation  value 
of  aboat  £1,200,000,  of  which  barely  more  than  a  tithe 
reached  the  owners — led  to  the  largest  '  trekking  '  of  the 
Boers.  Angry  with  the  Government  which  broke  up  their 
old  institutions,  and  defrauded  by  the  agents  who  received 
on  their  behalf  what  they  regarded  as  a  very  inadequate 
return  for  the  property  taken  from  them,  more  than  10,000 
migrated  to  the  northern  districts,  near  the  source  of  the 
Orange  River,  over  which  some  of  their  kinsmen  liad 
already  scattered  themselves,  and  there  they  established  a 
Republic,  which  claimed  to  be  quite  independent  of  Great 
Britain.  The  claim  was  for  a  long  time  disputed,  and  in 
1848  English  sovereignty  over  it  was  formally  asserted  by 
Sir  Harry  Smith.  All  English  control  was  abandoned,  how- 
ever, in  1854,  since  which  date  it  has  existed,  and  in  some 
ways  flourished,  as  the  Orange  Free  State,  with  an  area  of 
41,484  square  miles,  and  a  population,  in  1885,  of  133,518, 
of  whom  more  than  half  were  whites,  and  of  whom  3,270 
were  in  Bloemfontein,  its  centre  of  government. 

In  the  Orange  Free  State  the  Boers  have  lost  many 
characteristics  that  formerly  made  them  obnoxious.  '  It  is 
not  a  wealthy,  neither  is  it  an  enterprising  community,'  it 
was  written  i  .  1884.  '  The  feature  of  society  is  a  patri- 
archal Conservatism,  in  accordance  with  which  the  prin- 
ciples of  Church  and  State  are  stoutly  maintained.  To  bo 
a  laud-drost  or  a  church  elder,  such  are  the  objects  of  tlie 
Boer's  earthly  ambition.  His  religion  is  a  comfortable  one, 
because  it  is  not  disturbed  by  speculation,  nor  by  the  bu]-n- 
ing  fever  of  obstinate  questionings  ;  on  the  contrary,  he 
resigns  himself  peacefully  to  the  traditions,  behefs,  and 
dogmas  of  his  forefathers  ;  nor  does  ho  wander  far  from  the 
fold  of  the  Dutch  Reformed  Church.  Placed  in  a  black 
man's  country,  he  feels  somehow  that  the  dislmction  bo- 
*  Parliamentary  Papers,  June,  1836,  part  ii.,  p.  75. 


;t 


i '  ■  i 


III 


.1 


1 


i 


174 


CAPE  COLONY. 


!  ;■  '■',  I 


i)  . 


!;■ 


t 


1  ;  1 '  ■ 


tvveen  himself  tu..l  the  aborigines  is  a  real  one,  and  the 
Constitution  of  his  state  is  drawn  up  vHh  distinct  reference 
to  this  demarcation  ;  in  the  eye  ol  neither  Church  nor 
State  can  the  black  man  be  held  equal,  and  he  refers  to  the 
Old  Testament  as  an  authority  for  this  distinction.  The 
presence  of  the  natives  makes  the  Boers  look  upon  them- 
selves as  a  superior  caste,  an  oligarchy  of  white  men  placed 
in  the  midst  of  African  natives  to  possess  their  land  and 
govern  them.  Having  only  one  broad  distinction — between 
black  and  white — they  cannot  comprehend  the  gradations 
and  differences  between  white  men  themselves  in  a  crowded 
and  civihzed  country.'^' 

To  the  north  of  the  Orange  Free  State  is  the  Transvaal, 
more  than  twice  as  large,  but  with  a  smaller  white  popula- 
tion, composed  chieny  of  those  Boers,  and  their  children, 
who  were  not  satisfied  with  the  easy-going  life  of  their  kins- 
men near  Bloemfontein  ;  but  of  this  district  it  will  be  more 
convenient  to  speak  in  the  next  chapter,  in  connection  with 
the  history  of  Natal.  Another  offshoot  of  Cape  Colony  is 
British  Kaffraria,  extending  to  the  north-east  as  far  as 
Natal,  which  was  formally  annexed  in  1865,  having  on  one 
side  of  it  Basutoland,  bounded  by  the  Orange  Free  State, 
and  on  the  other  Pondoland,  touching  the  Indian  Ocean. 
In  these  districts,  peopled  almost  entirely  by  blacks,  the 
chief  effort  is  to  afford  tliem  British  protection,  and  that  is 
done  more  successfully  than  in  the  northern  and  western 
territories.  In  the  west,  all  the  country  as  far  as  Namaqua- 
land  and  south  of  the  Orange  Eiver,  where  ostrich-farming 
is  a  principal  pursuit,  has  gradually  been  annexed  to  Cape 
Colony.  In  the  north,  and  to  the  west  of  the  Orange  State, 
West  Griqualand,  including  Kimberley,  with  diamond  and 
gold  fields,  discovered  in  1867,  leads  up  to  Bechuanalaud,  a 
part  of  which  was  placed  under  British  protection  in  1884:, 
and  in  which  the  great  trade  route  to  the  heart  of  Africa 
passing  through  it  is  a  constant  source  of  jealousy  and 
quarreUing  between  the  rival  races  and  communities  in 
*  Greswell,  *  Our  South  African  Empire,'  vol,  i,,  pp.  163-Jfl5, 


it  IS 

Lcru 
i[iia- 
ling 
fape 
late, 
laud 
I,  a 
^84, 
Irica 
laud 
in 


ITS  GROWTH  AND  ITS  OFFSHOOTS. 


'75 


those  parts.  The  whole  of  Capo  Colony,  apart  from  tlio 
protected  territories,  comprises  about  212,000  square  miles, 
and  its  population  was  estimated  at  237,000  whites  and 
484,000  blacks  in  1875,  aud  340,000  whites  and  900,000 
blacks  in  1885. 

Of  the  white  population,  by  far  the  larger  part  is  col- 
lected in  Cape  Town,  which  has  nearly  50,000  inhabitants, 
and  the  other  ports  and  markets  on  the  coast.  Elsewhere 
it  is  but  sparsely  sprinkled  among  the  blacks,  who  [.ssist  it, 
not  unwillingly,  in  turning  to  account  the  resources  of  the 
country,  in  which  agricultural  and  pastoral  pursuits,  and 
especially  the  supply  of  wool  and  skins  for  exportation,  are 
the  staple  industries  ;  though  ostrich-feathers,  ivory  brought 
from  the  interior  of  Africa,  and,  more  recently,  the  pro- 
ducts of  the  diamond  and  gold  jfields  in  the  northern  dis- 
tricts, are  important  articles  of  trade.  It  is  to  bo  feared 
that  these  more  attractive  products,  while  enriching  tlio 
colony,  have  had  much  to  do  in  giving  an  unhealthy  tone  to 
its  political  life.  There  is  not  now  a  largo  residue  of  tliu  old 
Dutch  settlement  in  it ;  but  tlie  laler  English  colonists  have 
retained  the  land-grabbing  inclinations  of  their  precursors. 

Under  a  military  dictatorship  till  1825,  and  after  that  with 
no  more  real  power  of  self-government  than  was  accorded 
to  other  Crown  colonies,  the  Cape  was  endowed  witli  a  liberal 
constitution  in  1853,  which  was  further  enlarged  in  1872. 
Both  its  Legislative  Council  and  its  House  of  Assembly  are 
elected  under  a  franchise  that  accorls  a  vote  to  everyone  in 
receipt  of  an  income  of  £50  a  year  or  having  house  property 
worth  £25  ;  and  the  power  thus  given  to  the  ignorant  and 
pliable  majority  lowers  the  character  of  the  Legislature  here, 
as  in  some  parts  of  the  United  States.  The  British  Govern- 
ment has  not  always  been  wise  or  consistent  in  the  policy 
it  has  adopted  or  prescribed  towards  Boers  and  natives  in 
South  Africa;  but  when  it  has  sought  to  do  well,  it  has 
often  been  crippled  by  the  legislators  in  the  colony  and  the 
local  executive  amenable  to  them.  The  mischief  thus  occa- 
sioned has  been  painfully  shown  in  the  vacillating  treat- 


I') 

\\\ 


!76 


CAPE  COLONY. 


r  ■•' 


iiient  of  the  difricultios  that  have  lately  arisen  between  Cape 
Colony  and  both  Boers  and  natives,  and  in  the  *  little  wars  ' 
that  have  been  wantonly  provoked  in  the  Transvaal  and 
other  parts. 

These  '  little  wars  *  are  likely  to  be  frequent  until  the 
whole  of  South  Africa  is  brought  under  British  dominion, 
with  or  without  maintenance  under  it  of  the  Boer  republics 
now  existing  ;  but  it  should  be  the  task  of  statesmen  and 
philanthropists,  if  they  cannot  prevent  evil  being  done,  to 
see  that  as  nutch  as  possible  is  prevented.  Already  the 
Hottentots  and  Bushmen  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  old 
Capo  settlement  have  been  nearly  exterminated  ;  but  there 
are  allied  races  in  Bechuan  aland  and  el  sow'  jre  who  should 
be  saved  from  a  similar  fate;  and  if  that  fate  is  to  be  shared 
by  the  sturdier  Kaliirs,  experience  hap  taught  us  that  the 
cruel  issue  cannot  be  reached  without  grievous  loss  as  well 
as  heavy  disgrace  to  the  usurpers. 


'^W/ 

6^ 

^^e 

1 

fe^ 

%^ 

1 1 


CHAPTER  XV. 

NATAL. 

THE  KAFFIRS— FIRST  ENGLISH  VISITS  TO  THE  EASTERN  COAST  OF  SOUTH 
AFRICA — THE  SETTLEMENT  OF  PORT  NATAL — ITS  EARLY  TROUBLES  AND 
LATER  PROGRESS— THE  TRANSVAAL — QUARRELS  WITH  THE  BOERS  AND 
THE  ZDLUS— OUR  COMPLICATIONS   IN  SOUTH   AFRICA.      [1683-1888.] 

(iHE  various  tribes  of  South  African  Kaffirs  are 
supposed  to  be  of  the  same  stock  as  the  Kaflirs 
of  Persia,  and  to  have  migrated  four  or  five 
thousand  years  ago  from  the  neighbourhood  of 
the  Tigris  or  Euphrates,  passing  southwards 
through  Egypt,  and  carrying  with  them  the  language, 
habits,  and  rehgious  practices  of  their  forefathers.  In  all 
these  respects  their  affinity  with  the  Asiatic  race  is  still 
traceable.  They  differ  essentially  from  the  Hottentots  and 
other  inferior  inhabitants  of  Africa.  'The  physical  confor- 
mation of  the  body  is  fine.  The  men  ordinarily  stand  about 
five  feet  ten  inches  to  six  feet  high,  slenderly  built,  but  cor 
pact  and  wiry.  Not  unfrequently  the  head  is  well  developed, 
displaying  considerable  mental  power ;  and  amongst  the 
men  the  numerous  ways  in  which  they  are  called  to  engage 
in  intellectual  gladiatorship  impart  an  intelligence  and  ex- 
pressiveness to  the  whole  contour  which  are  far  removed 
from  the  low  savage  or  the  sordid  barbarian.'*  Many  of 
their  customs  and  institutions  are  savage  and  barbarous 

*  Holden,  'The  Past  and  Future  of  the  Kaffir  Races,'  p.  174. 

12 


ly 


:5] 

i:: 

if 

I 

■n 


|!:l 


Hi? 


m  ' 

?      ! 


178 


AA  TAL. 


1  •  !     ' 


\^'^ 


^ 


\  t      I 


'^i! 


'I' 


enough ;  but  even  their  vices  often  show  traces  of  rough 
virtues  not  possessed  by  their  neighbours.  These  are  the 
people  with  wliose  southern  tribes  the  Dutch  and  English 
residents  in  Capo  Colony  liavo  been  in  contact  and  conflict 
during  upwards  of  a  century,  and  with  whoso  northern 
tribes,  especially  the  Zulus,  we  have  lately  been  brought 
into  relationship  by  our  colonization  of  Natal. 

Port  Natal — so  called  because  he  entered  its  harbour  on 
Christmas  Day — was  discovered  by  Vasco  do  Gama  in  1498. 
But  for  more  than  three  centuries  the  eastern  shores  of 
South  Africa  were  rarely  visited  by  Europeans,  unless  they 
were  shipwrecked  on  the  coast  or  forced  to  pay  it  a  brief 
visit  in  search  of  provisions  for  their  onward  voyages  to  the 
East  Indies. 

The  first  English  intercourse  was  in  1683,  when  a  trading 
vessel  was  lost  near  Delagoa  Bay,  about  a  hundred  leagues 
north  of  Natal.  '  The  natives,'  says  the  old  chronicler, 
*  showed  the  shipwrecked  men  more  civility  and  humanity 
than  some  nations  that  I  know  who  pretend  much  religion 
and  politeness ;  for  they  accommodated  their  guests  with 
whatever  they  wanted  of  the  product  of  their  country  at 
very  easy  rates,  and  assisted  what  they  could  to  save  part 
of  the  damaged  cargo,  receiving  very  moderate  reward  for 
their  labour  and  pains.  For  a  few  glass  beads,  knives, 
scissors,  needles,  thread,  and  small  looking-glasses,  they 
hired  themselves  to  carry  many  things  to  a  neighbouring 
country,  and  provided  others,  who  also  served  as  guides 
towards  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and  provided  eatables  for 
their  masters  all  the  while  they  were  under  their  conduct. 
And  having  carried  them  about  two  hundred  miles  on  their 
way  by  land,  they  provided  new  guides  and  porters  for  them, 
as  the  others  had  done,  for  seven  or  eight  hundred  miles 
farther,  which  they  travelled  in  forty  days,  and  so  deli^'ered 
their  charge  to  others,  till  they  arrived  at  the  Cape.  And, 
some  of  the  English  falling  sick  on  the  way,  they  carried 
them  in  hammocks  till  thev  either  recovered  or  died :  and 
ut  of  eighty  men  there  were  only  three  or  four  that  died ; 


n 


iring 
lides 
Is  for 
luct. 
their 
lem, 
liles 
lered 
md, 
tried 
land 
lied; 


THE  FIRST  EUROPEAN  VISITORS. 


179 


but  how  long  they  journeyed  before  they  got  to  the  Cape  I 
have  forgotten.  This  account  I  have  from  one  of  the  travel- 
lers, lie  told  ni"  that  the  natural  fertility  of  those  countries 
he  travelled  through  niadu  the  inhabitants  lazy,  indolent, 
indocile,  and  simple.  Their  rivers  are  abundantly  stored 
with  good  lish  and  water-fowl,  besides  sea-cows  and  croco- 
diles ;  their  woods  with  large  trees,  wild  cattle  and  deer, 
elephants,  rhinocerosoH,  lions,  tigers,  wolves,  and  foxes ; 
also  many  sorts  of  fowl  and  birds,  with  ostriches.'* 

It  was  piubahly  in  consequence  of  the  report  of  the  ship- 
wrecked Englishmen,  who  certainly  had  no  reason  to  charge 
their  kind  friends  with  being  '  lazy  and  indocile,'  that  a  few 
years  afterwards,  in  1689,  the  Dutch  colonists  at  the  Cape 
sent  a  vessel  to  explore  the  eastern  coast.  '  One  may  travel 
two  or  throe  hundred  miles  through  the  country,'  said  one 
of  the  party,  '  without  any  cause  of  fear  from  men,  provided 
you  go  naked,  and  without  any  iron  or  copper ;  for  these 
things  give  inducement  to  murder  those  who  have  them. 
Neither  need  one  be  in  any  apprehension  about  meat  and 
drink,  as  they  have  in  every  village  a  kraal,  or  house  of 
entertainment  for  travellers,  where  they  are  not  only  lodged, 
but  fed  also.'f 

So  well  pleased  were  the  '^utch  with  this  district  and  its 
people,  that,  in  1690,  they  sent  an  agent  to  purchase  the 
Bay  of  Natal  and  its  neighbourhood  for  'some  merchandise,' 
consisting  chiefly  of  copper,  cutlery  and  beads,  valued  at  29,000 
guilders.  But,  fortunately  for  the  Zulu  Katiirs,  the  Dutch, 
fully  occupied  at  the  Cape,  made  no  use  of  their  purchase. 
During  another  hundred  years  the  natives  had  undisturbed 
possession  of  their  homes,  and  then  they  were  troubled,  not 
by  Europeans,  but  by  another  race  of  Kaflirs,  who,  coming 
down  from  the  inland  mountain  region,  spread  desolation 
over  the  district  north  and  south  of  Natal  Harbour. 

No  European  colony  in  this  district  was  seriously  thought 
of  till  1823,  when  it  was  visited  by  Lieutenant  Fairwell,  of  the 
Boyal  Marines,  who,  being  welcomed  by  Utshaka,  or  Chaka, 

*  Chase,  'Natal  Papers,'  vol.  i.,  p.  2.  t  Holden,  p.  128. 

12—2        o 


1 . 


Ill 


I,: 


I 
■1 


uA 


IMAGE  EVALUATION 
TEST  TARGET  (MT-S) 


4 


A 


^c 


11!!  1.0 


1^ 

1.25 


ISitU    |2.5 

|50    "^^     MUSK 

"  1^  ll2-0 


LA.  IIIIII.6 


V] 


/^ 


/ 


^J> 


Photographic 

Sciences 
Corporation 


23  WI^ST  MAIN  STREET 

WEBSTER,  N.Y.  14580 

(716)  872-4503 


\ 


^^ 


\\ 


^f^      <1^' 

V 


^ 


^ 


I^\5 


I 


1 80 


NA  TAL. 


{■ 


i       \: 
i  i 


the  victorious  Kaffir  chieftain,  sought  and  obtained  permis- 
sion of  Lord  Charles  Somerset,  governor  of  Cape  Colony,  to 
plan  J  in  it  a  settlement  cl:  Englrohmen.  This  he  promptly 
did.  Accompanied  by  Mr.  Fynn,  Captain  King,  a  few 
other  Europeans,  and  some  Hottentots,  he  proceeded  to 
Delagoa  Bay,  where  Utshaka  gave  him  a  grant  of  about 
3,000  square  miles  of  land  and  several  herds  of  cattle.  '  We 
had  an  opportunity  of  further  gaining  his  friendship,*  wrote 
Fairwell  to  the  governor,  '  by  curing  him  of  a  dangerous 
wound  he  received  since  we  have  been  here  ;  aud  I  trust  I 
shall,  by  frequent  communications  and  a  studious  endeavour 
to  avoid  giving  offence,  increase  his  aud  his  subjects*  confi- 
dence in  us.'* 

Fairwell  began  his  work  nobly ;  but  it  was  jealously  re- 
garded by  the  Cape  colonists.     Having  built  a  little  vessel 
at  his  settlement,  he  sent  it  with  a  cargo  of  ivory  down  to 
Algoa  Bay,  where  it  was  refused  admittance,  aud  forced  to 
rot  on  the  beach,  on  the  plea  that  it  was  not  provided  with 
any   official   register   as   a   British    trading-ship. t      Thus 
thwarted,  the  brave  pioneer  of  Natal  colonization  managed 
to  open  a  route  by  land,  and  thus  conveyed  his  wares  for 
sale  in  Graham's  Town.     He  \vas  not  allowed,  however,  to 
pursue  his  enterprise  for  long.     In  1828  Utshaka,  a  fierce 
despot  who  had  discernment  enough  to  desire  the  benefits 
likely  to  result    from    intercourse  with    Europeans,   was* 
assassinated  by  his  younger  brother  Udingaan  ;   and  this 
new  tyrant,  apparently  enraged   at   the   conduct  of  some 
Dutch  settlers  on  the  border-land  between  his  territory  and 
Cape  Colony,  soon  caused  or  sanctioned  the  destruction  of 
the  little  colony.     Perhaps  also  he  was  alarmed  at  its  rapid 
progress,  and  at  the  friendship  shown  by  the  English  to  the 
older  inhabitants  of  the  district,  who,  having  fled  into  the 
woods  when  it  was  invaded  by  Utshaka,  now  came  back  in 
considerable  numbers  to  share  in  its  prosperity.     Fairwell 
and  some  of  his  followers  were  murdered  while  crossing  the 

*  Chase,  vol.  i.,  p.  97. 

t  Parliamentary  Papers,  1835,  part  'i.,  p.  97. 


for 
er,  to 
fierce 
enefits 
was 
id  this 
some 
ry  and 
ion  of 
s  rapid 
to  the 
to  the 
Dack  in 
airwell 
ing  the 


I 


ITS  COLONIZA  TION. 


iSi 


mountains  in  1829.  An  attack  was  then  made  upon  the 
Delagoa  Bay  settlement,  and,  many  of  its  residents  being 
put  to  death,  ihe  rest  were  compelled  to  abandon  it. 

The  enterprise  was  revived  in  1835.  In  the  previous  year 
the  authorities  at  Cape  Colony,  at  length  alive  to  the  value 
of  the  project,  had  obtained  the  permission  of  the  British 
Government  to  enter  upon  it  with  spirit.  Captain  Allen 
Gardiner,  whose  miserable  death  at  Terra  del  Fuego  is  well 
known,  proceeded  on  a  mission  to  the  tyrant;  and,  after 
some  difficulty,  partly  removed  by  the  promise  of  a  red 
cloak,  obtained  from  him  not  only  a  grant  of  land  similar  to 
that  mado  to  Fair  well,  but  about  4,000  more  square  miles. 
Tlie  town  of  D'Urban,  in  Natal  Harbour,  now  called  Durban, 
was  laid  out,  and  to  it  proceeded  some  Englishmen  and  a 
larger  number  of  Dutch,  who,  having  left  Cape  Colony  in 
disgust  at  the  liberation  of  their  slaves  in  1834,  came  in 
search  of  fresh  means  of  aggrandizement  in  the  new  settle- 
ment. Their  coming  had  a  memorable  issue.  Quarrels 
soon  broke  out,  as  before,  between  them  and  the  Kaffirs ; 
and  in  1838  a  battle  was  fought  in  which  the  Europeans 
were  defeated  with  great  slaughter.  It  seemed  as  if  Natal 
was  to  be  once  more  abandoned.  A  small  military  force, 
however,  was  sent  up  from  Graham's  Town  to  protect  it. 
This  protection,  otherwise  inactive,  enabled  the  settlers  to 
make  arrangements  for  fighting  their  own  battles.  They 
boldly  attacked  Udingaan  in  1840,  and  overcame  him, 
thereby  so  weakening  his  repute  among  his  own  people  that 
he  was  soon  afterwards  assassinated. 

The  Dutch  residents,  who  were  far  more  numerous  than 
the  English,  now  having  supremacy  in  Natal,  announced 
their  intention  of  making  it  independent  of  British  authority, 
and  ihe  centre  of  a  republican  settlement,  in  alliance  with 
the  neighbouring  Orange  Free  State.  An  EugUsh  force 
was  sent  to  quell  this  rebellion ;  and  its  result  was  the 
formal  annexation  of  the  settlement  to  Cape  Colony  in  1843. 
In  1845  a  Lieutenant-Governor  and  Executive  Council  were 
appointed.     In  1848  Natal  was  allowed  to  have  its  own 


+t»^r 

i  ■  ' 

1      t 

i| 

\ 

si;! 

\'  Mi 


1 82 


NATAL. 


I     !; 


v-\ 


W- 


■ 


I  s\ 


Legislative  Council ;  and  in  1856  it  was  converted  into  a 
separate  and  distinct  colony,  with  a  House  of  Assembly,  to 
which  twelve  members  were  elected  by  the  inhabitants,  four 
others  being  appointed  by  the  Crown. 

Since  then  it  has  grown  rapidly.  Its  white  population, 
which  in  1846  numbered  about  6,000,  increased  sixfold 
during  the  next  forty  years.  The  white,  coloured,  and  black 
inhabitants,  comprised  within  an  area  of  16,880  square 
miles,  were  in  1866  estimated  at  193,103.  In  1884  it  con- 
tained, within  19,000  square  miles,  about  36,000  Europeans, 
362,000  Zulus,  and  27,000  Indian  coolies— 425,000  in  all ; 
and,  with  exports  valued  at  £958,000,  its  imports  exceeded 
£1,675,000.  But  this  progress  was  not  easily  or  in  all 
respects  honourably  achieved. 

The  history  of   the  Transvaal  is  concurrent  with  the 
history  of  Natal.     Though  the  English  planted  the  colony 
on  the  Indian  Ocean,  the  Boer  emigrants  from  the  Cape 
were  most  numerous  and  energetic  in  it  during  the  first  few 
years,  and  it  was    by  them    that    Pietermaritzburg,  the 
capital,  was  established.   When  their  efforts  to  set  up  there 
an  independent  government  were  crushed  in  1842,  they 
*  trekked '  northward,  leaving  the  Orange  Free  State  and 
the  Vaal  Eiver  as  its  boundary  on  their  left,  and  at  Potchef- 
stroom  prepared  the  foundations  of  the  Transvaal  Eepublic, 
under  a  leader  named  Potgieter.     'Their  policy,'  we  are 
told,  ♦  was  the  same  then  as  it  has  always  been  ;  and,  acting 
on   their  well-known    principles,   they   sowed   dissensions 
among  the   Matabele    clans.      The   native    tyrant,   called 
Moselekatse,  had  ruled  the  country  round  Potchefstroom 
with  an  iron  hand,  and  some  of  his  subjects  who  were 
victims  of  his  cruelty  welcomed  the  Boers  as  deliverers. 
The  latter,  strengthened  by  these  natives,  as  well  as  by 
bodies  of  their  own  countrymen,  asserted  their  dominion, 
establishing  a  rough  sort  of  government  under  command- 
ants, land-drosts,  and  field-counts.    Of  course,  they  treated 
the  natives  as  a  subject  race,  bound  to  render  Gibeonite 
services ;  they  confined  them  within  certain  areas,  inaugu- 


acting 


THE  TRANSVAAL  AND  ZULULAND. 


183 


rated  vagrancy  measures,  and  prohibited  the  sale  of  fire- 
arms and  ammunition  among  them.  For  themselves  they 
claimed  the  most  absolute  independence.'*  Their  conduct 
was  resented  and  forbidden  by  the  authorities  in  Cape 
Town ;  but  the  only  result  was  that  the  Boers  extended 
their  operations  east,  west,  and  north,  till  they  laid  claim  to 
a  territory  with  an  area  of  112,000  square  miles,  in  which 
in  1885  there  were  50,000  or  60,000  wnites,  and  about 
750,000  Kaffirs  and  Hottentots  of  various  races,  with 
Pretoria  as  its  capital. 

The  independence  of  the  Transvaal,  then  a  much  smaller 
territory,  was  recognised  by  the  British  Government  in 
1852,  and  it  prospered  in  its  way  during  the  next  quarter  of 
a  century.  That  way,  however,  involved  it  in  fierce  quarrels 
with  the  neighbouring  tribes  of  Kaffirs,  and  especially  with 
the  followers  of  Secocoeni,  and  the  more  formidable  Zulu 
chieftain  Cetewayo,  both  in  the  region  lying  between  the 
Transvaal  and  the  Indian  Ocean  and  to  the  north  of  Natal. 
It  was  on  the  plea  that  it  was  necessary  to  put  a  stop  to 
these  quarrels  that  Sir  Theophilus  Shepstone,  at  the  bidding 
of  the  British  Government,  annexed  the  Transvaal  in  1877. 
At  that  time  a  project  was  on  foot  for  establishing  a  South 
African  Federation  of  all  the  governments  and  settlements 
in  this  part  of  the  continent,  on  the  model  of  the  Dominion 
of  Canada,  and  Sir  Bartle  Frere  was  appointed  Governor  of 
Cape  Colony  and  High  Commissioner,  with  a  view  to  its 
being  enforced.  Many  troubles  were  incident  to  this  abortive 
project  and  its  concomitants. 

The  first  series  of  troubles  arose  from  Sir  Bartle  Frere's 
attack  on  Cetewayo.  This  remarkable  man  was  the  son  of 
Panda,  a  bold  chieftain  who,  since  1840,  had  been  recognised 
as  their  king  by  all  the  Zulus  to  the  xiorth  of  Natal,  but 
who,  before  his  death  in  1872,  had  allowed  dissensions  to 
arise  among  them.  In  a  civil  war  that  had  broken  out,  the 
faction  led  by  Cetewayo  routed  the  king's  party,  all  his  six 
other  sons  were  slain,  and,  though  Panda  was  not  deposed, 

*  Greswell,  vol.  i.,  p.  181. 


!  I 


li; 


■  t 


ill 

'^\ 

1:: 

'  *  I 


\ ' 


.m 


'if  i; 


ri 


m 


II- 
I 


iiFi'- 


iiui 


1 84 


NATAL. 


«     t 


iH 


Cetewayo  became  the  real  master  of  the  country.  When 
his  father  died  and  he  was  actual  king,  he  increased  his 
fighting  strength,  and,  without  apparent  reason,  was  re- 
garded with  so  much  alarm  by  the  colonists  of  Natal,  that 
in  1878  Sir  Bartle  Frere  resolved  to  demolish  it.  In  this 
the  English  invaders  succeeded ;  but  not  until  they  had  sus- 
tained an  appalling  defeat  at  Isandlwana,  in  January,  1879, 
and  had  been  otherwise  punished  for  their  wanton  aggres- 
sion ;  and  the  territorial  rearrangements  that  followed  the 
overthrow  of  Cetewayo  in  no  way  compensated  for  the 
disaster  and  disgrace  through  which  they  were  procured. 

Other  troubles  ensued  in  the  Transvaal,  where  the  Boers, 
chafing  under  the  British  rule  imposed  on  them,  though  it 
helped  them  to  much  material  benefit  and  promised  them 
much  more,  were  encouraged  by  our  difficulties  in  Zululand 
to  hope  that  they  might  regain  their  liberties  by  an  appeal 
to  arms  ;  and  in  this  they  succeeded.   Bringing  fresh  disaster 
and  disgrace  to  England,  after  their  revolt  in  1880,  at  Lang's 
Nek,  Ingogo,  and  Majuba  Hill,  their  later  defeats  secured 
so  little  peace  to  the  conquerors  that  a  restoration  of  inde- 
pendence to  the  Transvaal  had  to  be  conceded,  substantially 
in  1881,  and  completely  in  1884.     These  concessions,  how- 
ever, gave  no  assurance  that  England  should  be  free  hence- 
forth from  complications  and  responsibilities  arising  out  of 
Boer  encroachments,  either  upon  Bechuanaland  to  the  west, 
or  upon   Zululand  to  the  east.     Nor  was  there  any  real 
promise  of  peace  with  the  Zulus  in  the  temporary  pacifica- 
tion effected  by  Cetewayo's  reinstatement  over  a  part  of  his 
former  dominions,  soon  to  be  followed  by  his  death  at  the 
hands  of  Usibepu,  and  the  succession  of  his  son  Denizulu 
to  the  Zulu  kingship  in  1884. 

The  burden  of  our  fighting  for  the  extension  of  territory 
and  of  political  and  trading  influence  on  behalf  of  Natal,  as 
well  as  of  Cape  Colony,  has  fallen  on  England  rather  than 
on  the  colonists,  and,  to  many  of  them,  even  their  own  mis- 
fortunes have  brought  pecuniary  profit.  Hence  the  risks  of 
further  fighting,  which  would  be  great  in  any  case,  are  much 


ENCROACHMENTS  IN  SOUTH  AFRICA. 


iS: 


of 
uch 


greater  tliau  they  would  otherwise  be.     In  South  Ah-ica 
there  are  ahnost  boundless  regions  which  offer  sufficient 
temptations  to  adventurers  in  trade,  conquest,  and  the  least 
commendable  forms  of  colonization  ;  and  in  the  constant 
jealousies   and  frequent   struggles  of  the  different   native 
races,  as  yet  only  partially  or  not  at  all  under  our  control, 
there  is  some  excuse,  if  no  justification,  for  English  inter- 
ference.    The  excuses  and  pretexts  of  English  adventurers, 
moreover,  are  strengtliened  by  Boer  example,  and  the  mis- 
chiefs caused  by  it.    The  Boers  preceded,  and  still  generally 
surpass,  the  English  in  fomenting  and  seeking  to  gain  by 
the  turmoils  inevitable  to  the  savage  virtues  as  well  as  to 
the  savage  vices  of  the  natives;  and  the  wisdom  and  philan- 
thropy that  might  lead  Englishmen  by  themselves  to  abstain 
from  meddling  with  these  natives,  or  to  exert  none  but  such 
honest    missionary    influence   over    them  as    Livingstone 
aimed  at,  are  overruled  by  arguments  in  favour  of  rougher 
and  more  selfish  influences.     It  is  urged,  with  some  force, 
that  if  the  English  do  not  continue  to  encroach  on  the 
natives,  to  drive  them  off,  or  master  them,  they  will  merely 
leave  the  field  open  for  the  harder  tyranny  of  the  Boers, 
and  that  matters  have  been  brought  to  such  a  pass  that, 
unless  English  or  Boers  advance  against  the  natives,  they 
will  one  or  both  be  expelled  by  them.     All  our  wars  with 
Hottentots  and  Kaffirs  have  but  necessitated  further  wars, 
and  each  fresh  encroachment  but  increases  the  area  of  the 
complications  we  have  to  deal  with,  and  lengthens  and 
multiplies  the  lines  along  which  we  are  being  tempted  or 
compelled  to  encroach  yet  more. 

As  it  is,  the  British  dominions  and  their  connections  in 
South  Africa  are  too  large  to  be  manageable.  '  Excepting 
India  and  Ceylon,'  it  was  said  in  1885,  '  there  are  more 
natives  in  this  country  than  anywhere  else.  It  is  calculated 
that  in  Natal  itself  there  are  nearly  half  a  million,  and  in 
the  Cape  Colony  and  the  border  territories  under  imperial 
and  colonial  control  more  than  a  million.  According  to  a 
late  calculation  of  the  Cape  population,  the  proportion  of 


|!   H'f'i 


t  i 


i   A 


■ 


vi 


hi 


186 


NA  TAL. 


natives  to  Europeans  is  nearly  three  to  one.  In  Natal  tho 
natives  outnumber  the  settlers  by  more  than  twelve  to  one. 
In  the  Orange  Free  State  the  number  of  settlers  and  natives 
is  more  evenly  distributed ;  but  in  Transvaal  there  is  a  large 
and  growing  preponderance  of  Bechuanas,  Swazies,and  other 
branches  of  the  teeming  Bantu  race.  The  Dutch  republics 
practically  assert  that  complete  assimilation  is  impossible. 
The  English  system,  as  carried  out  in  the  Cape,  Natal, 
and  their  borders,  admits  of  the  possibility  of  assimilation 
by  graduating  forms  of  government.  Wherever  there  is 
a  reserve  territory,  or  a  partially  independent  country 
governed  by  head-men,  chiefs  and  white  magistrates  com- 
bined, there  are  to  be  witnessed  the  workings  of  a  transition 
stage.  Complete  assimilation  in  the  end  seems  to  be  the 
goal.  Meantime  a  provisional  state  of  government,  with  the 
incidental  and  civilizing  influences  of  traders  and  missionaries, 
is  in  vogue.'*  If  the  influence  of  the  traders  is  not  wholly 
injurious,  the  influence  of  the  missionaries  is  not  wholly 
beneficial,  and  the  divided  authority  of  English  agents  and 
native  chieftains  can  hardly  be  expected  to  work  well. 

*  Greswell,  vol.  i.,  pp.  101,  102. 


I 


CHAPTEE   XVI. 

BRITISH   INDIA. 

THE  PROGRESS   OF   BRTTISH   TRADE   AND    CONQUEST   IN   INDIA — ITS    PRESENT 
CONDITION — BUIIMAH   AND  ASSAM.      [1600-1888.] 

EITISH  INDIA  is  not,  according  to  the  usual 
sense  of  the  word,  a  colony ;  and  the  memorable 
story  of  its  gradual  acquisition  forms  a  separate 
and  eventful  portion  of  the  annals  of  our  empire. 
Only  some  of  the  most  salient  features  in  that 
story,  therefore,  need  be  briefly  touched  upon  in  this 
volume. 

The  great  peninsula  was  unvisited  by  Englishmen,  with 
the  exception  of  a  few  daring  travellers  by  land  and  sea, 
until  a  century  after  Vasco  de  Gama's  discovery  in  1498  of 
a  passage  to  it  by  way  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  In 
1599  the  English  East  India  Company  was  formed ;  and 
in  1601  its  first  trading  fleet  went  out  to  sow  the  seeds  of 
commerce  and  conquest,  not  on  the  mainland,  but  in  some 
of  the  rich  islands  south-west  of  it.  The  first  British  factory 
on  the  peninsula  was  established  in  1612,  by  Captain  Best, 
at  Surat ;  and  after  that  commerce  throve  mightily,  and 
conquest  slowly  advanced,  during  a  hundred  and  fifty  years. 
The  Dutch,  the  Portuguese,  and  the  French  were  rivals  of 
the  English  in  the  prosperous  trade,  and  most  of  our  early 
fighting  was  with  them.  In  furtherance  of  their  strife,  how- 
ever, the  Europeans  sought  allies  among  the  natives  of  the 


:)3 


ill    '' 


i::  ■ 

I 

i*  < 

j 

*1 

3| 

'{ 

' 'iifii 

1 

*  % ' 

J 

. «« ; 

'*!' 

''    I 

1 

I 

0'' 

Ml' 


[: I  ill 
1 


li 


a 


i88 


BRITISH  INDIA. 


11   li' 


\       ' 


country.  Thus  each  acquired  a  sort  of  jurisdiction  far 
beyond  the  narrow  limits  of  their  forts  and  factories ;  and 
at  length  the  English,  having  driven  out  their  rivals,  found 
themselves  associated  with  numerous  local  potentates  who 
acknowledged  their  supremacy,  and  at  variance  with  others 
who  had  aided  the  cause  of  the  now  defeated  European 
rivals.  In  that  way  the  conquest  of  India  was  brought 
about  in  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century.  The  daring 
and  dishonourable  exploits  of  Clive  and  Warren  Hastings 
are  well  known.  The  territorial  rule  of  the  East  India 
Company  began  with  Clive 's  war  in  the  Carnatic,  and  his 
great  victory  at  Plassey  in  1757.  It  was  partly  won  by  aid 
of  some  native  soldiers,  now  for  the  first  time  employed 
under  English  officers,  and  destined,  during  just  a  century, 
to  be  the  main  instruments  of  English  power  in  overcoming 
one  native  prince  after  another,  and  in  acquiring  great  dis- 
tricts in  quick  succession,  until  the  whole  peninsula  was 
brought  into  subjection,  and  kept  in  order  by  means  of  the 
famous  Sepoy  army.  At  the  end  of  the  century,  the  Sepoys, 
overpetted  in  some  respects  and  needlessly  offended  in 
others,  turned  against  their  employers.  The  great  Indian 
Mutiny  of  1857  was  the  result ;  and,  overcome  by  bravery 
and  martial  wisdom  rarely  equalled  in  the  whole  world's 
history,  it  led  to  the  transference  of  the  vast  Indian  empire 
from  the  rule  of  the  East  India  Company  to  the  direct 
dominion  of  the  British  Crown. 

The  territories  thus  transferred,  and  including  several 
native  states,  protected  but  not  governed  by  England,  com- 
prised at  that  time  an  area  of  more  than  1,000,000  square 
miles.  Their  dimensions  now  exceed  1,580,000  square 
miles — a  space  more  than  twelve  times  as  large  as  that  of 
Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  and  they  contain  a  population 
more  than  seven  times  as  numerous.  The  inhabitants,  esti- 
mated at  263,000,000  in  1887,  more  than  suffice  for  the 
cultivation  of  the  land  and  the  development  of  its  resources ; 
and  the  only  openings  in  it  for  European  residents  are  as 
agents  of  Government,  teachers,  missionaries,  and  traders. 


C0.:QUEST  AND  TRADE. 


189 


Bveral 

com- 

uare 

uare 

at  of 

ation 

esti- 

the 

rces ; 

re  as 

ders. 


Much  has  yet  to  be  done  lu  education  of  the  people  as  to 
better  ways  of  agriculture,  and   more   useful   methods  of 
iutercliaiif^ing  their  commodities,  but  great  progress  has  been 
made  in  tliese  respects  during  recent  years.     The  revenue, 
which  was  £27,000,000  in  1851,  and  £30,000,000  in  1859, 
exceeded  £48,000,000  in   18G8,  and  £74,000,000  in  1880. 
The  imports  of  merchandize,  worth  £4,000,000  in  1834,  rose 
in  value  to  £11,500,000  in  1850,  to  £30,000,000  in  1808,  and 
to  £44,000,000  in  1880.    The  exports  of  the  same  years  were 
£8,000,000,  £18,000,000,  £53,000,000,  and  £00,000,000.   The 
incoming  trade  had  been  multiplied  nearly  eleven  times,  and 
the  outgoing  trade  more  than  eight  times,  in  the  course  of 
half  a  century.     The  raw  cotton  alone  sent  from  India  to 
the  United  Kingdom  in  1880  was  worth  £10,000,000  ;  and 
the  cotton  goods  sent  back  exceeded  in  value  £18,000,000. 
Besides  cotton,  this  great  territory,  possessing  nearly  every 
variety  of  soil  and  temperature,  furnishes  rice,  wheat,  sugar, 
coffee,  tea,  silk,  wool,  flax,  indigo  and   other  dyes,  with 
spices,  oils,  and  a  hundred  other  commodities.     Bombay, 
the  great  trading  capital  of  India,  contains,  with  its  suburbs, 
three-quarters  of  a  million  inhabitants ;  and  the  population 
of  Calcutta,  the  centre  of  government,  and  scarcely  inferior 
as  a  resort  of  trade,  is  as  large.     The  English  residents  in 
the  whole  dependency,  however,  numbered  in  1881  only 
70,188  males  and  13,010  females,  besides  the  military  estab- 
Ushment. 

Important  changes  have  during  recent  years  taken  place 
in  the  administration  of  India,  with  a  view  to  the  encourage- 
ment of  the  natives  in  self-government,  and  other  necessities 
of  healthy  national  life ;  and  the  spread  of  education  and 
general  enlightenment  has  been  very  remarkable.  Much, 
however,  remains  to  be  done  before  the  reproach  we  have  long 
incurred,  of  ruling  the  country  for  our  own  advantage,  and 
with  no  more  regard  to  the  interests  of  its  people  than  selfish 
prudence  prescribed,  will  be  removed.  Of  the  revenue 
collected — two-sevenths  by  a  laud-tax,  one-eighth  from  the 
opium  monopoly,  and  about  a  tenth  by  a  tax  on  salt — about 


1 1 


ih  > 


\m.\ 


i 
I 


it 


'M 


190 


URITISH  INDIA. 


I  i 


I  ■ 


a  fourth  is  spent  in  maintaining  an  army  which  is  intended 
and  used  rather  for  the  upholding  and  extendi vig  of  British 
power  in  its  foreign  relations,  than  for  any  service  that  the 
people  regard  as  beneficial  to  themselves;  and  the  same  may 
be  said  of  a  large  part  of  the  other  general  administrative 
machinery,  which,  with  the  payment  of  interest  on  debt,  ex- 
hausts another  fourth  of  the  income.  Few  of  the  natives 
have  been  willing  to  admit  that  the  heavy  expenses  incurred 
of  late  years,  in  the  Afghan  War  of  1878  and  1879,  in  the 
employment  of  Indian  troops  before  and  after  that  time  in 
the  Abyssinian  and  Egyptian  Wars,  and  in  the  more  recent 
acquisition  of  Upper  Burmah,  were  of  advantage  to  their  own 
country. 

Burn..  ■•  h  is  more  of  a  colony  than  any  other  portion  of  our 
Indian  E)npire.  The  districts  nearest  to  the  Bay  of  Bengal, 
a  long  strip  of  narrow  territory,  with  Rangoon  at  the  mouth 
of  tlio  Irrawaddy,  as  their  capital,  were  annexed  after  the 
first  and  second  Burmese  Wars  in  1826  and  1852.  In  1885, 
a  pretext  was  found  for  the  third  Burmese  War,  by  which 
the  large  and  fertile  expanse  of  country  in  the  interior, 
stretching  up  to  Assam  on  the  north,  and  to  the  frontiers  of 
Tonkin  on  the  east,  were  wrested  from  King  Theebaw.  It 
is  rich,  not  only  in  forest-land  and  agricultural  resources, 
but  in  mines  yielding  precious  metals  and  precious  stones, 
and,  if  its  3,500,000  or  more  inhabitants,  spread  over  an  area 
of  about  140,000  square  miles,  can  be  brought  into  subjection, 
may  become  an  important  field  for  English  settlement  as 
well  as  for  English  trade. 

Assam,  with  a  population  of  nearly  15,000,000,  ceded  to 
the  East  India  Company  in  1854,  and  formally  established 
as  an  outlying  province  of  the  Bengal  dominion  in  1874,  has 
long  been  famous  and  profitable  as  a  tea-producing  country. 


'Nv 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

OUR  ASIATIC   COLONIES. 

CETLON— ITS  EARLY  CIVILIZATION — ITS  SUBJECTION  TO  THE  PORTl'OUESE,  THE 
DUTCH,  AND  THE  ENGLIHH — ITS  PKESENT  CONDITION — THE  STRAITS  8ETTLE- 
MENTS  :  MALACCA,  PENANO,  /  ND  SINGAPORE— HONfi  KONO— SARAWAK  AND 
LAUUAN— THE  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF  SIR  JAMES  UUOOKE — BRITISH  NORTH 
BORNEO— MAURITIUS.      [1795-1888.] 

HE  East  India  Company,  formed  *  for  the  advance- 
ment of  trade  and  merchandise  to  the  East 
Indies  and  the  islands  and  countries  thereabout,' 
found  so  much  profit  in  its  intercourse  with  the 
mainland  of  Hindostan,  that,  during  two  cen- 
turies in  which  other  European  nations  were  establishing  in 
them  forts,  factories,  and  colonies,  it  gave  little  thought  to 
the  outlying  portions  of  the  East  Indies.  Not  till  near  the 
close  of  the  eighteenth  century  was  their  value  understood 
or  effort  made  to  appropriate  some  of  them  as  dependencies 
of  England.  And  even  then  this  was  done  rather  in  jealousy 
of  the  rival  nations  than  in  the  interests  of  trade. 

So  e^^pecially  it  was  with  Ceylon.  This  beautiful  island, 
with  an  area  of  nearly  25,000  square  miles,  and  therefore 
not  much  smaller  than  Ireland,  was  famous  for  its  wealth 
and  civilization  in  the  days  of  Alexander  the  Great,  and  in 
yet  more  remote  times.  Conquered  twenty-four  centuries 
ago  by  an  Indian  prince,  it  was  long  ruled  by  a  Sinhalese 
dynasty,  the  last  representative  of  which  was  only  deposed 
in  1815  A.D.    Auuradhapura,  its  ancient  capital,  said  to  have 


ii!  i 
■i 

■Ml 


.    '1 

'  ll 

ft              fl 

1 

I 

l1 

I ''! 

•5 

1 

1  ^ 

> 

1; 

.1 

l\  : 

'! 


■p 


fill! 


•!!!M]i 


ig: 


OUR  ASIATIC  COLONIES. 


been  founded  in  437  B.C.,  covered  sixteen  square  miles,  and 
was  adorned  with  splendid  architectural  works,  the  remains 
of  which  yet  exist.  Huge  tanks  and  sluices,  so  stoutly  built 
of  granite  and  other  hard  stone  that  some  of  them  are  still, 
after  the  lapse  of  more  than  two  thousand  years,  but  little 
injured,  served  to  irrigate  the  laud,  and  helped  it  to  maintain 
the  five  or  six  million  inhabitants  whom  it  is  supposed  to  have 
contained  in  its  former  days  of  splendour.  It  was  still  popu- 
lous and  thriving,  though  much  decayed,  when  the  Portu- 
guese began,  in  1518,  to  build  a  fort  and  plant  a  settlement 
at  Colombo.  Much  misery  resulted  to  the  inhabitants  from 
that  settlement,  however,  and  war  between  the  natives  and 
aggressors  lasted  nearly  all  through  the  century  and  a  half 
of  Portuguese  occupation.  The  Dutch,  who  expelled  and 
succeeded  their  rivals  in  1656,  brought  no  better  fortune  to 
the  Sinhalese  during  their  tenure  of  Colombo,  which  also 
lasted  for  nearly  a  century  and  a  half.  In  1795,  as  an  inci- 
dent of  the  great  war  between  England  and  France,  which 
was  then  master  of  Holland  and  its  dependencies,  they  were 
ousted  by  the  English,  and  Ceylon  became  a  British  posses- 
sion. At  first  in  the  hands  of  the  East  India  Company,  it 
was  made  a  Crown  colony  in  1802. 

The  early  incidents  of  British  rule  were  inauspicious.  Au 
unwise  invasion  of  Kandy,  then  the  centre  of  native  au- 
thority, in  1803,  issued  in  the  ignominious  defeat  and 
slaughter  of  nearly  all  the  invnders.  Other  troubles  followed, 
which  ended  in  the  conquest  of  the  whole  island  in  1815. 
Measures,  for  the  most  part  prudent  and  generous,  were 
then  taken  foi  the  improvement  of  the  colony  ;  and  latterly 
its  progress,  unmarked  by  any  memorable  incidents,  has 
been  very  rapid.  In  1814,  Ceylon  contained  about  852,910 
inhabitants.  In  1832  the  number  was  estimated  at 
1,009,008;  in  1852,  at  1,707,194;  in  1866,  at  2,008,027,  and 
in  1885  at  2,825,090.  The  revenue  of  the  island,  only  about 
£200,000  in  1827,  was  £1,182,000  in  1885.  The  imports  were 
valued  at  £329,933  in  1828;  at  £1,181,149  in  1853;  at 
£3,517,184  in  1866,  and  at  £4,087,932  in  1885.    The  exports 


•'V-, 


CEYLON,  PAST  AND  PRESENT. 


'93 


amounted  to  £215,372  in  1828 ;  to  £979,87 1  in  1853 ;  to 
£3,070,248  in  1866,  and  to  £3,384,412  in  1885.  The  prin- 
cipal commodities  exported  are  coffee,  tea,  cinnanion, 
tobacco,  and  cocoa-nut  oil,  with,  in  some  years,  a  consider- 
able supply  of  pearls  and  precious  stones. 

This  great  increase  of  trade  is  chiefly  due  to  British  enter- 
prise ;  but  hardly  more  than  20,000  of  the  inhabitants  are 
Europeans,  or  of  European  descent.  The  rapid  growth  of 
population  is  native,  or  derived  from  Oriental  colonization. 
The  natives  are  of  four  races,  varying  much  in  civilization 
and  powers  of  development.  The  Veddas,  or  aborigines, 
frequent  the  forests  stretching  from  the  south  to  the  north- 
west, and  all  the  more  inaccessible  parts  of  the  island,  where, 
hardly  superior  to  monkeys,  they  form  nearly  the  lowest  and 
most  degraded  of  all  the  members  of  the  human  family. 
The  Sinhalese,  found  chiefly  around  Kandy  and  in  the  region 
south  of  it,  handsome  in  body,  show  traces  of  an  effet;>  civili- 
zation, and  regard  the  white  men  with  a  hatred  for  which 
some  excuse  may  be  found  in  the  hard  treatment  they  have 
received  from  Europeans.  '  Jealousy,  slander,  litigation, 
and  revenge,'  says  Sir  James  Emerson  Tennant,  *  prevail 
among  them  to  an  unlooked-for  excess.  Licentiousness  is 
so  universal  that  it  has  ceased  to  be  opprobrious,  and  hatred 
so  ungovernable  that  murders  are  by  no  means  rare.  False- 
hood, the  unerring  index  of  innate  debasement,  is  of 
ubiquitous  prevalence.  Theft  is  equally  prevalent ;  and 
deceit  in  every  conceivable  shape,  in  forgery  and  fraud,  in 
corruption  and  defamation,  is  so  notorious  amongst  the 
uneducated  mass,  that  the  feeling  of  confidence  is  almost  un- 
known ;  and  in  the  most  intimate  arrangements  of  domestic 
life,  the  bond  of  brotherhood  or  friendship,  of  parent  and  of 
child,  inspires  no  effectual  reliance  in  the  mutual  good  faith 
and  honour  of  the  interested  parties.'  Superior  to  these  are 
the  Malabars  or  Hindoos,  who  appear  to  have  long  ago  settled 
in  Ceylon,  and  who  most  abound  in  the  northern  and 
eastern  parts  of  the  island ;  and  the  Moors,  a  mixed  race, 
containing  African  blood,  and  perhaps  partly  formed  out  of 


LB 


lli^lU 


'X\ 


ii  r 


■   Vi' 


m 


•  I 


',  ■'  i 


loj 


('/•A'  ASIA  in-  (•('/('A7/;\. 


the  sl.'iV(MV  (^sliihlislu'tl  Ity  the  riMlii};ii(>s(^  niid  l^uU'li,  who 
mc  luuil-worUmg  trmhM'H  jiiul  jirtisiuiH  in  till  pints  of  ('oylon. 
'Thoso  last  two  racoM  pro  o  tlio  host  stMvaiits  ol"  tlio  Miif^hsh 
luoivhaiits  aiitl  phiiUtMs. 

( 'oylon  is  parlioularly  rioh  in  nil  V(^}^«>tahlo  prodnclions, 
{\o\\\  oolTiM»,  lt>a.,  oinnM,n>on.  uiul  y\(\\  to  (he  lnl^l^  toaU  and 
pahn,  with  i^hony  aiul  other  oahinet  woods.  A^riindtnn^ 
yii'Ms  tMnpU\\  in(Mit  to  n»os|,  ol"  the  iidiahitants.  ^'ot,  as  Sir 
I'-ntiMson  TtMniant  has  said.  '  in  Ceylon  a.^iMi'nlture,  in  all  its 
hranehes,  nnist  lu^  regarded  as  an  art  ahnost  nnknown. 
Notwithstaniling  all  the  a.dvantai;('s  in  varii'ty  of  soil,  gradu- 
ations o{  temperature  and  a»lai)ta.hility  of  climate,  the  eul- 
tixation  of  riee  may  he  said  to  he  the  only  sueeessful  tilla|;(i 
of  the  natives.  With  tin*  favourahle  eireinnstanees  alluded 
to.  and  the  expanse  i>f  surfaei>  io  h(*  applied,  it  is  impossihie 
ti^  lori'sec^  the  extiMit  to  whieh  tlu>  proviuetions  of  nearly 
t'very  other  country  mit;ht  ho  dinui^stieated  and  extontled 
throui;lunit  this  island.  In  the  hi^'hlauils  and  mountain 
regions,  and  particularly  in  the  wooded  valleys  and  ojieu 
l^lains.  which  are  found  at  an  elevation  of  from  3,000  to  7,000 
feel,  there  is  an  encoura^inj;"  iield  for  the  introduction  of 
most  of  the  grains  and  ve>;etable  productions  of  Ijuropo.* 
Much  has  been  done  since  those  words  were  written  ;  but 
vast  tracts  of  country  still  wait  to  bo  roclaimo*!  from  the 
agi^ressions  of  tis;ers  an*!  elephants  upon  the  scones  of  by- 
5;one  civili.:ation  in  Covlon. 

.Mmost  the  same  mav  bo  said  of  the  districts  oast  of 
Ceylon,  on  the  other  side  of  the  Hay  of  J>enm;l,  now  known 
as  the  Straits  Settlements,  incUuliui;  Singapore,  Ponaiif:;, 
Malacca,  and  some  other  dependencies.  The  Malayan 
peninsula,  a  long  striit  of  land  co:u;..ining  about  1,000  scjuaro 
miles,  belonged  to  the  Portuguese  from  loll  till  IGll.  It 
was  then  held  by  the  Dutch  for  a  century  and  a  half.  It 
was  afterwards  twice  captured  by  the  English  and  twice 
restoroi".  to  its  former  owners  before  tiually  becoming  British 
proper'  y  in  IS'ia.  In  it  tin  abounds  ;  and  rice,  sugar, 
coffee,   cotton,   indigo,  chocolate,  and   various   spices  arc 


'N~, 


THE  STRAITS  SETTLEMENTS. 


•05 


])i(>lirir.  On  il.H  WdHtcM'ii  wido,  tlui  litUn  iHliiiid  of  Pciiiuif^, 
iilioiit  lis  liii^^ti  an  tlio  IkIo  of  Wi^liL,  in  a  fertile  ganlcn  of 
s|)ic(iH  ;  ami  Siii^a|)()r(\  an  island  about  twice  an  larj^Mi, 
luljoiniiif^'  tlu^  Houtlieni  extroinity  of  the  mainland,  is  ricli  in 
tinilxu'  of  evei-y  HorL  'riie  Hinaller  inland  wan  a('.(iuired  by 
IIm^  I'liist  India  C-onjiKiny  in  l7'H;j  ;  the  other  waH  taken  hy 
Sir  Stamford  UallhjH  in  IHIl)  from  a  horde  (/f  alK)ut  a 
lumdred  ami  fifty  Malayan  pirateH.  All  the  three  (hipen- 
denci(!H  were  united  under  one  j^ovornment,  an  the  Straits 
ScttliMnents,  and  tluiir  euHtody  was  trannferred  from  the 
Must  India  Company  to  theOrown  in  IHOT.  'J'heir  a}^'^regat(3 
population  exceeds  '1U(),()00,  amongHt  whom  Chinewe  ini- 
niij^M-ants  are  as  nunuM-ous  as  the  native  Malays  and  moro 
active;  and  tluiy  derive  ^'reat  profit  from  trade  between  all 
the  Mast  Indian  Islands  and  Europe,  for  which  the  situation 
of  Singapore — 'the  little  shop/  as  the  name  implies— in 
especially  adapted.  The  goods  ])assing  in  and  out  in  IHHG 
wore  valued  at  more  than  .C15,000,0()0,  and  gave  employ- 
ment to  ships  with  a  total  carrying  power  of  more  than 
3, 100,000  tons,  altliough  the  resources  of  the  colonies  them- 
Holves,  save  in  the  j)roduction  of  opium  and  spirits,  arc 
yet  but  scantily  made  use  of. 

Much  of  tlio  trade  by  which  Singapore  is  enriched  is 
derived  from  China,  and  ])asses  through  the  little  island  of 
Hong  Kong,  one  of  the  snuillest  of  all  the  colonies  of  Creat 
Britain.  '  The  is'and  consists  of  a  broken  ridge  of  moun- 
tainous hills  at  an  average  height  of  about  1,000  feet;  l)ut 
from  this  ridge  and  its  spurs  various  conical  mountains 
rise  to  the  height  of  1,500  or  2,000  feet  above  the  sea,  and 
are  very  precipitous.  The  greatei-  part  of  the  coast  shelves 
abruptly  from  the  ocean,  particularly  on  the  north  face. 
Tliere  are  a  few  narrow  valleys  and  deep  ravines  through 
which  the  soa  occasionally  bursts,  or  which  serve  as  conduits 
for  the  mountain  torrents  ;  but  on  the  north  side  of  tho 
island,  especially  where  tho  town  of  Victoria  is  built,  tho 
rocky  ridge  approaches  close  to  tii^  harbour ;  and  it  was 
ouly  by  hewing  through  this  ridge  that  a  street  or  road 

13—2 


0! 


,...!■ 


;  ! 


'    i ' 


\\\^ 


n  1  ^^ 


196 


OUR  ASIATIC  COLONIES. 


t 
'i'j ,  1  '■ 


■     II     1        ! 


?    ll 


;.ii 


could  be  made  to  connect  the  straggling  lines  of  buildings 
which  extend  along  the  water's  edge  for  nearly  four  miles. 
Here  and  there,  on  the  tops  of  some  isolated  hills,  or  along 
the  precipitous  slopes  of  the  mountPins,  scattered  houses 
have  been  constructed ;  but  rugged,  broken,  and  abrupt 
precipices,  with  deep  rocky  ravines,  must  effectually  prevent 
any  contracted  population  from  being  able  to  provide 
efficiently  for  its  own  protection,  cleanliness,  and  comfort. 
Hong  Kong  cannot  be  said  to  possess  any  vegetation ;  a  few 
goats  with  difficulty  find  pasturage.'*  A  rugged  beauty 
characterizes  the  island-rock,  and  its  harbour  is  one  of  the 
finest  in  the  world ;  but  its  geological  formation,  and  the 
pernicious  climate  to  which  it  is  exposed,  render  it  very 
unhealthy. 

This  inhospitable  little  island,  with  an  area  of  about 
thirty  square  miles,  for  centuries  the  haunt  of  pirates  and 
smugglers,  was  ceded  to  Great  Britain  by  China  in  1842  as 
a  free  port  for  trade,  and  a  naval  station  for  the  protection 
of  British  interests  in  Chinese  waters.  To  it  was  added 
the  small  peninsula  of  Kowloon  in  1861.  Its  population, 
about  12,000  in  1842,  was  29,500  in  1849,  117,500  in  1867, 
and  180,000  in  1886 ;  but  of  these  only  about  8,000  were 
Europeans,  and  45,000  British-born  Chinese,  most  of  the 
others  being  visitors  or  settlers  from  the  mainland.  The 
revenue  of  the  colony  rose  from  £31,078  in  1847  to  £265,619 
in  1886.  Much  has  been  attempted,  and  something  has 
been  done  in  recent  years,  to  raise  the  standard  of  morality, 
in  trade  and  other  ways,  among  the  residents;  and  its 
unique  position  gives  it  splendid  advantages  as  a  haunt  of 
commerce.  Its  early  importance,  however,  was  partly  due  to 
the  jealousy  of  the  Chinese  in  excluding  foreign  trade  from 
other  ports ;  and  now  that  a  better  policy  has  been 
established,  some  of  its  commerce  is  passing  from  the 
unhealthy  rock  in  the  south  to  more  attractive  and  more 
commodious  places  on  the  northern  coast. 

South  of  H^ng  Kong,  and  east  of  Singapore,  is  Borneo, 

*  Martin,  vol.  vi.,  p.  63. 


-Sw 


more 


i 


HONG  KONG  AND  BORNEO. 


197 


the  largest  island  in  the  world,  with  the  exception  of 
Australia,  famous  as  a  resort  for  pirates  through  many 
centuries,  and  for  the  philanthropic  efforts  towards  its 
redemption  made  in  recent  times  by  Kajah  Brooke. 

The  English  and  other  nations  had  more  than  once 
sought  to  effect  a  settlement  and  open  trade  on  its  shores  ; 
and  considerable  efforts  in  this  direction  were  made  ^'n  the 
sixteenth  century  by  the  Portuguese,  and  subsequently  by 
the  Dutch,  in  connection  with  their  work  in  Java  and  other 
East  Indian  islands.  But  on  each  occasion  the  Europeans 
were  forced  to  retire  by  their  own  impolicy  as  well  as 
by  the  murderous  conduct  of  native  marauders. 

At  length,  in  1839,  James  Brooke,  then  thirty -six  years 
of  age,  resolved  to  attempt  the  estabhshment  of  a  better 
state  of  things.     *I  go,'  he  said,  '  to  awaken  the  slumbering 
spirit  of  philanljLropy  with  regard  to  these  islands.     Fortune 
and  life  I  freely  give ;  and,  if  I  fail  in  the  attempt,  I  shall 
not  have  lived  wholly  in  vain.*    Proceeding  to  Sardwak,  on 
the  western  coast  of  Borneo,  he  conciliated  the  inhabitants, 
and  was  soon  chosen  by  them  as  rajah.    This  office  he 
accepted  in  1841,  on  condition  that  slavery  and  piracy 
should  be  abolished  in  the  region  assigned  to  him,  and  that 
he  should  use  any  means  he  found  necessary  for  their  entire 
suppression ;  that  Englishmen  should  have  right  of  trade  in 
any  part  of  the  great  island,  and  that  the  smaller  island 
of  Labuan  should  be   ceded   to  Great  Britain.     To  these 
proposals  the  nominal  Sultan  of  Borneo  agreed ;  and  for 
his  services  Brooke  was  rewarded  by  the  English  Crown 
with    knighthood,   and    endowed  with   the    functions    of 
Governor  of  Labuan  and  Consul-General  in' Borneo.     He 
also  sought  to  have  his  dominions  in  Sardwak  recognised  by 
the  British  Government,  and  to  receive  national  aid  in  the 
work,  on  which  he  had  already  expended  £12,000  of  his 
own.     This,  however,  was  denied,  and  he  was  forced  to 
carry  on  the  work  in  his  own  way. 

The  people  over  whom  he  had  to  rule,  and  ruled  success- 
fully for  more  than  twenty  years,  occupy  an  intermediate 


r  i 


■  !"!■ 


•.\\ 


'  M 


M\ 


.l,1i' 


'^:  : 


'I  ;r 


198 


OUR  ASIATIC  COLONIES. 


;  : 


■  « 

■I 


position  between  the  Malayans,  who  have  in  modern  times 
acquired  a  footing  and  a  nominal  dominion  over  the  whole 
island,  and  the  aboriginal  and  only  half-human  Malanaus, 
or  Paketans,  who  occupy  the  interior.  They  are  of  two 
classes :  the  Hill  Dyaks,  who  are  spread  over  the  greater 
portion  of  Sarawak,  as  well  as  other  parts  of  Borneo,  and 
are  poor,  industrious,  and  peaceable  ;  and  the  Sea  Dyaks, 
living  on  the  coast  and  on  the  banks  of  large  rivers,  who 
are  of  much  fiercer  disposition.  It  was  these  whom  Rajah 
Brooke  sought  especially  to  reclaim.  *  They  have  never 
been  more  than  nominally  subject  to  the  Malays,'  we  are 
told  ;  '  and  Sir  James  Brooke  is  the  first  master  whom  they 
have  really  obeyed.  Every  year  a  cloud  of  murderous 
pirates  issued  from  their  rivers  and  swept  the  adjacent 
coasts.  No  man  was  safe  by  reason  of  his  property  or  in- 
significance, for  human  heads  were  the  booty  sought  by 
these  rovers,  and  not  wealth  alone.  Villages  were  attacked 
in  the  dead  of  night,  and  every  adult  cut  off.  The  women 
and  grown  girls  were  frequently  slaughtered  with  the  men, 
and  children  alone  were  preserved,  to  be  the  slaves  of  the 
conqueror.  Never  was  warfare  so  terrible  as  this.  Head- 
hunting became  a  mania  which  spread  like  a  horrible  disease 
over  the  whole  land.  Murder  lurked  in  the  jungle  and  on 
the  river.  The  aged  warrior  could  not  rest  in  his  grave  till 
his  relations  had  taken  a  head  in  his  name :  the  maiden 
disdained  the  weak-hearted  suitor  whose  hand  was  not  yet 
stained  with  some  cowardly  murder.'* 

This  spirit  prevailed  among  the  Sea  Dyaks  when  Sir  James 
Brooke  went  to  rule  over  and  to  reform  them.  From  his 
nephew,  Mr.  Charles  Brooke,  who  succeeded  him  as  Rajah 
in  1868,  he  received  important  help  in  the  good  work  he  was 
able  to  do.  *  He  first  gained  over  a  portion  of  these  Dyaks 
to  the  cause  of  order,'  says  the  nephew,  *  and  then  used 
them,  as  instruments  in  the  same  cause,  to  restrain  their 
countrymen.  The  result  has  been  that  the  coast  of  Sarflwak 
is  as  safe  to  the  traders  as  the  coast  of  England,  and  that 
*  Boyle,  '  Adventures  among  the  Dyaka  of  Borneo.' 


RAJAH  BROOK  IN  SARAWAK. 


199 


n  times 
e  whole 
ilanaiis, 
of  two 
greater 
eo,  and 
Dyaks, 
rs,  who 

1  Rajah 

2  never 
we  are 
)m  they 
rderous 
.djacent 
y  or  in- 
ight  by 
Stacked 

women 
16  men, 
I  of  the 
Head- 
disease 
and  on 
rave  till 
maiden 
not  yet 

James 
rom  his 

Eajah 
he  was 

Dyaks 
n  used 
n  their 
ar^wak 
id  that 


I 


an  unarmed  man  can   travel   the  country  without  let  or 
hindrance.'     That  end  \,as  not  gained  without  uilhculty. 
The  chief  trouble  came  from  the  custom  of  head-hunting. 
Every  now  and  then  a  raid  would  be  made  upon  Sarawak 
from  some  inland  place,  and  half  a  dozen  or  more  of  the 
natives  would  be  decapitated.     As  often,  parties  of  four  or 
five  of  Rajah  Brooke's  subjects  would  make  an  excursion  in- 
land, in  hopes  of  returning  with  a  few  stolen  heads  as 
trophies  of  their  prowess.     '  As  soon  as  ever  one  of  these 
parties  started,  or  even  listened  to  birds  of  omen  preparatory 
to  moving,'  says  Mr.  Brooke,  *  a  party  was  immediately  de- 
spatched by  Government  to  cut  them  off,  and  to  fine  them 
heavily  on  their  return ;  or,  in  the  event  of  their  bringing 
heads,  to  demand  the  delivery  of  them  up,  and  the  payment 
of  a  fine  into  the  bargain.   This  was  the  steady  and  unflincli- 
iug  work  of  years  ;  but,  before  many  months  were  over,  my 
stock  of  heads  became  numerous  and  the  fines  considerable.' 
All  who  offered  resistance  were  declared  enemies  of  the 
Government,  and  burnt  out  of  their  houses,  alien  tribes 
being  employed  to  do  the  work.     Occasionally  larger  ex- 
peditions were  organized,  under  the  leadership  of  the  Rajah 
himself  or  his  nephew,  who  went  inland  or  on  water,  with 
two  or  three  hundred  followers,  to  punish  the  more  remote 
or  more  troublesome  tribes,  when  English  guns  easily  suc- 
ceeded against  native  swords  and  spears.     Thus  some  sort 
of  order  and  civilized  behaviour  has  been  established.     *  It 
is  a  singularly  easy  government  to  carry  on,'  we  are  assured ; 
*  tribes,  one  with  another,  being  so  well  balanced  that  in  the 
event  of  danger  arising  from  one  party,  the  other  may  be 
trusted  to  counteract  evil  influences.'* 

By  this  bold  enterprise  of  Sir  James  Brooke  and  his 
nephew  a  territory  comprising  about  30,000  miles,  and  larger 
than  Ceylon,  has  been  acquired  by  an  English  family,  with- 
out being  part  of  the  English  dominion;  and  the  present 
Rajah  Brooke  reigns  with  a  benevolent  despotism  over  so 
many  of  his  nominal  subjects,  reckoned  at  nearly  a  quarter 

*  Charles  Brooke,  'Ten  Years  in  Sarawak.' 


r  i 


i^l 


\A 


h^h!;g 


m 


200 


Or/^  ASIATIC  COLONIES. 


\\ 


1.M 


''1 


of  a  million,  as  can  bo  brought  under  his  control.  A  great 
civilizing  influence  has  undoubtedly  been  set  up  in  Sarilwak, 
which  has  a  considerable  trade  in  sago,  gutta-percha,  india- 
rubber,  and  other  commodities.  In  1884  its  revenue  was 
about  CnO.OOO,  and  the  value  of  its  imports  and  exports  more 
tlian  .€050,000. 

The  little  island  of  Labuan,  to  the  north-cast  of  Sarawak, 
which  became  an  English  colony  through  Sir  James  Brooke's 
action,  has  also  made  modest  and  useful  progress  since  1848, 
when  it  came  into  our  possession.  Its  population  of  some 
6,000,  entirely  native  with  the  exception  of  a  few  officials, 
finds  employment  in  connection  with  the  trade  that  has 
grown  up  with  the  mainland.  Its  revenue,  only  £59  in 
1848,  amounted  to  £4,491  in  1885. 

A  larger  outcome  of  the  same  movement  has  been  the 
establishment  of  British  North  Borneo,  under  conditions 
that  are  in  some  respects  a  curious  revival  of  the  pioneer 
methods  of  English  colonization.     The  success  of  Sardwak 
encouraged  an  association  of  English  capitalists,  in  1877,  to 
obtain  from  the  Sultans  of  Brunei  and  Sulu,  the  portions  of 
Borneo  north  of  the  Brookes'  dominion,  and  of  the  region 
claimed  by  the  Dutch   Government,  a  grant  of  all  the 
nortliernmost  corner  of  the  island,  and  in  1881  this  associa- 
tion expanded  into  the  North  Borneo  Company,  and,  armed 
with  a  charter  from  the  British  Crown,  proceeded  to  make 
use  of  its  territoiy.     The  territory,  including  several  small 
islands  fronting  its  coast-line  of  more  than  500  miles,  is  as 
extensive  as  Sardwak,  and,  capable  of  yielding  almost  un- 
limited supplies  of  rice,  sago,  sugar,  tobacco,  opium,  and 
other  produce,  besides  minerals  and  precious  stones,  may 
hereafter  be  an  important  and  profitable  possession.   It  had 
progressed  so  far  that  in  1886  its  imports  were  valued  at 
£170,000,    and  its  exports  at  £105,000,    four  seaports  — 
Elopura  and  Silam  on  the  east  coast,  Gaya  on  the  west,  and 
Kudat  on  the  north — having  been  started,  and  many  plots 
of  land,  both  on  the  coast  and  in  the  interior,  having  been 
put  under  cultivation. 


.SI .!.-■ . — 


NORTH  BORNEO  AND  MAURITIUS. 


aoi 


Though  it  is  an  African  rather  than  an  Asiatic  island, 
Mauritius  may  bo  conveniently  mentioned  in  this  cliapter. 
Alternately  a  Dutch  and  a  French  possession  between  1598 
and  1810,  when  it  was  captured  by  General  Abercrornbie  for 
the  EngUsh  East  India  Company,  this  island  was  of  more 
strategic  value  in  the  days  when  the  Easi  could  only  bo 
reached  by  vessels  passing  the  Capo  of  Good-  Hope  and 
thence  traversing  the  Indian  Ocean  than  it  is  now.  It  has 
scarcely  prospered  or  been  profitable  as  a  British  possession, 
though  its  population  grew  froia  about  19,000  in  1767  to 
370,000  in  1884.  Of  its  innabitants  more  than  two-thirds 
are  coolies,  imported  from  India  to  work  the  sugar  estates, 
on  which  the  staple  industry  of  the  colony  is  pursued.  The 
majority  of  the  other  residents  are  sugar-planters,  chiefly  of 
French  extraction,  though  in  Port  Louis,  the  seat  of  govern- 
ment and  only  important  town,  a  considerable  general  trade 
is  carried  on.  Producing  scarcely  anything  but  sugar  and 
rum,  Mauritius  is  liable  to  violent  storms  and  inclement 
weather,  which  render  the  crops  very  variable  from  year  to 
year.  For  their  food  and  clothing,  the  inhabitants  are 
almost  wholly  dependent  on  foreign  markets,  but  they 
obtain  some  grain  and  cattle  from  the  dependent  islands, 
more  than  seventy  in  number,  known  as  the  Seychelles  group, 
lying  nearly  a  thousand  miles  to  the  north  of  Mauritius. 


't\ 


tM 


I '/' 


land 
llots 


»een 


;M  1? 


'i. 


■A'    : 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 


EARLY  AUSTRALASIAN   DISCOVERIES. 


11 


h 


1 


r 


PORTUnUESR  AND  DUTCH  VISITS  TO  AUSTRALIA  —  TASMAN  —  RNOLISH 
VOYAGERS — DAMPIEB  IN  AUSTRALIA — CAPTAIX  COOK  IN  NEW  :<KAI  *ND 
AND  AUSTRALIA— FRENCH   KXPEniTIONS.      [1 606-1788.] 

USTRALIA,  a  vast  island  more  than  three-quarters 
of  the  size  of  Europe,  but  only  the  largest  of  a 
numerous  group  which  with  it,  in  prehistoric 
times  and  before  it  was  the  sport  of  volcanic 
action,  seems  to  have  formed  one  vast  southern 
continent,  was  first  visited  from  Europe  by  some  Portuguese 
voyagers  early  in  the  sixteenth  century.     The  nearer  regions 
of  the  East  Indies,  however,  then  proved  more  attractive ; 
and  no  distinct  effort  to  explore  it  appears  to  have  been 
made  till  1606  and  afterwards,  when  the  effort  was  not 
made  by  Portuguese,  but  by  Dutchmen.     Chiefly  by  them, 
during  the  eighteenth  century,  it  was  often  reached,  and  its 
most  accessible  parts,  as  well  as  the  adjoining  islands,  were 
gradually  explored,  Abel  Jansen  Tasman's  expeditions,  sent 
out  under  the  direction  of  Anthony  Van  Diemen  in  1642 
and  1644,  being  the  most  famous  and  fruitful  of  all.  Tasman 
first  discovered  the  island  which,  now  known  by  his  name, 
was  formerly  called  Van  Diemen's  Land,  in  honour  of  his 
employer.      Then    he    traversed    the    northern    shore    of 
Australia,  or  New  Holland,  as  it  was  then  and  for  a  long 
time  styled.     Others  of  his  race  carried  on   the  work  of 
exploration ;   but  all  these  voyages  of  discovery  failed  to 


a  long 


II 


1:^ 


if' 


n 

i 

*  I 

8 


M^ 


;;  !i 


m  ^ 


i! 

!l 


"  f 


m 


..-*>-:- 


DAMPIER  IN  A  US  TRALIA. 


203 


issue  in  colonization  ;  and  after  the  close  of  the  eighteenth 
century  the  Dutch  resigned  the  quest,  as  the  Portuguese 
had  done  before  them. 

Tlio  English,  wlio  had  not  before  been  altogether  idle, 
then  succeeded  to  the  enterprise.     William  Dampier,  who 
began  his  seaman's  life  as  a  buccaneer  in  the  West  Indies, 
was   the  first  of  our  nation  to  engage  in  it.     In  1088  he 
visited  the  north-western  part  of  Australia,  of  which  ho 
gave  an  unfavourable  report.     '  It  was  only  low  and  sandy 
ground,  the  points  only  excepted,  which  are  rocky,  as  some 
isles  in  the  bay.     This  part  had  no  fresh  water,  except  what 
was  dug,  but  divers  sorts  of  trees,  and  among  the  rest  the 
dragon-tree,  which  produces  the  gum  called  dragon's-blood. 
We  saw  neither  fruit-trees,  nor  so  much  as  the  track  of  any 
living  being  of  the  bigness  of  a  large  mastiff  dog ;    some 
few  land-birds,   but  none    larger  than   a  blackbird,   and 
scarcely  any  water-fowl.      The   inhabitants   are  the  most 
miserable  wretches  in  the  universe,  having  no  houses,  nor 
garments,  except  a  piece  of  the  bark  of  a  tree,  tied  like  a 
girdle  round  the  waist ;  no  sheep,  poultry,  or  fruits.     They 
feed  upon  a  few  fish,  cockles,  mussels,  and  periwinkles. 
They  are  without  religion  or  government.     They  are  tall, 
straight-bodied,  and  thin,  with  small,  long   limbs.     They 
have  gre:it  round  foreheads  and  great  brows.     Their  eyelids 
are  always  half  closed  to  keep  the  flies  out  of  their  eyes, 
they  being  so  troublesome  here  that  no  fanning  will  keep 
them  from  coming  to  one's  face.      So  that,   from  their 
infancy  being  thus  annoyed  with  these  insects,  they  do 
never  open  their  eyes  as  other  people  do ;  and,  therefore, 
they  cannot  see  far,  unless  they  hold  up  their  heads.     They 
are  long-visaged,  and  of  an  unpleasing  aspect,  having  no 
graceful  feature  in  their  faces.     The  colour  of  their  skin, 
both  of  their  faces  and  the  rest  of  their  body,  is  coal  black, 
like  that  of  the  negroes  of  Guinea.     They  live  in  com- 
panies, twenty  or  thirty  men,  women,  and  children  together. 
Their  only  food  is  a  sort  of  small  fish,  which  they  get  by 
making  weirs  of  stones  across  little  coves  or  branches  of  the 


M  ' 


:!• 


»»>  i 


i! 

'•I 

n 
'> 

i; 

'*  I- 

\M 
ai 


i' 


' 


:i  ;i 


kx 


xm 


1 1.1 
I-  'I 


'I  < 


204 


EARLY  AUSTRALASIAN  DISCOVERIES. 


<  t 


1:1 


A 


1 1 


( \ 


i\  i 


sea,  every  tide  bringing  in  the  small  fish,  and  there  leaving 
them  for  a  prey  to  these  people,  who  constantly  attend  to 
search  for  them  at  low  water.'* 

Dampier  went  to  Australian  waters  again,  and  made 
some  further  explorations,  in  1699,  though  his  chief  visit 
was  paid  to  the  same  western  districts  to  which  he  had 
gone  before.  Except  for  the  pleasure  of  discovering  the 
barrenest  spot  on  the  face  of  the  globe,  he  said,  his  achieve- 
ments in  New  Holland  would  not  have  charmed  him  much,  f 
He  then  sailed  north,  explored  New  Guinea,  and  discovered 
New  Britain. 

His  dismal  account  of  these  regions  helped  to  deter  other 
voyagers  from  following  in  his  track.  Nothing  memorable 
was  done  till  1769,  when  Captain  Cook,  proceeding  from 
Otaheite  in  his  famous  voyage  round  the  world,  reached  the 
south-eastern  side  of  New  Zealand,  and  established  some 
intimacy  with  its  bold  natives.  His  friendly  advances  being 
at  first  rejected,  he  killed  four  of  them  and  captured  two 
others,  thus  beginning  a  strife  long  fruitful  in  misfortune 
both  to  Englishmen  and  to  Maories.  Through  his  captives, 
however,  whom  he  treated  kindly,  he  and  some  of  his  party 
afterwards  were  able  to  land,  and  had  the  first  English 
experience  of  New  Zealand  life.  '  They  entered  some  of 
their  huts  and  saw  them  at  their  meals.  Their  huts  were 
very  slight,  and  generally  placed  ten  or  fifteen  together. 
They  found  them  generally  dining  on  fish,  and  eating  to  it 
the  bruised  and  roasted  roots  of  fern.  This  was  in  October. 
In  the  more  advanced  season  they  understood  that  they  had 
plenty  of  excellent  vegetables ;  but  they  saw  no  animals 
except  dogs.  They  found  both  men  and  women  painted 
w:th  red  ochre  and  oil,  but  the  women  much  the  most  so ; 
and,  like  the  South  Sea  Islanders,  they  saluted  by  touching 
noses.  They  wore  petticoats  of  native  cloth,  made  from 
the  New  Zealand  flax,  and  a  sort  of  cloak  or  mantle  of  a 

*  Howitt,  '  History  of  Discovery  in  Australia,  Tasmania,  and  New  Zea- 
land,' vol.  i.,  pp.  66,  67. 
f  Ibid.,  vol.  i.,  p.  72. 


h  i 


i. 

leaving 
pttend  to 

d  made 
lief  visit 
he  had 
ring  the 
achieve- 
much,  f 
icovered 

er  other 
morable 
ig  from 
hed  the 
d  some 
Bs  being 
red  two 
ifortune 
iiptives, 
!s  party 
nghsh 
ome  of 
were 
gether. 
to  it 
ctober. 
ey  had 
nimals 
ainted 
)st  so ; 
iching 
from 
of  a 

iw  Zea- 


CAPTAIN  COOK  IN  NEW  ZEALAND. 


205 


much  coarser  kind.  They  found  them  more  modest  in 
manner  and  more  cleanly  in  their  homes  than  the  Otahei- 
tians.  They  bartered  their  cloth  and  war-weapons  for 
European  cloth ;  but  nails  they  set  no  value  on,  having  as 
yet  evidently  no  knowledge  of  iron  and  its  uses.  What 
astonished  the  English  greatly  was  to  find  boys  whipping 
tops  exactly  like  those  of  Europe.  They  found  sbme  houses 
larger  and  more  strongly  built  than  those  on  the  shore. 
They  measured  one  canoe,  made  out  of  the  lobes  of  three 
trees,  which  was  68|  feet  long,  5  wide,  and  3  high.  These, 
as  well  as  their  houses,  were  much  adorned  with  carvings, 
in  which  they  seemed  to  prefer  spiral  lines  and  distorted 
faces.'* 

With  other  New  Zealanders,  as  he  sailed  along  the  south- 
east coast.  Captain  Cook  attempted  to  have  friendly  dealings ; 
but  his  attempts  generally  ended  in  quarrel  and  bloodshed, 
both  then  and  in  the  whole  of  b's  voyage  right  round  the 
New  Zealand  group.  Meaning  no  ill,  perhaps,  he  and  his 
party  acted  with  rashness  and  severity  which  have  had  de- 
plorable results  in  later  times,  whereas  more  forbearance 
might  have  been  attended  with  the  best  consequences. 
*  Without  measuring  the  past  by  the  present  standard,'  says 
one  who  had  access  to  native  traditions,  '  the  savage  New 
Zealanders  on  several  occasions  acted  as  civilized  men,  and 
the  Christians  like  savages.  Lieutenant  Gore  fired  from 
the  ship's  deck  at  a  New  Zealander  in  a  canoe,  who  had 
defrauded  him  of  a  piece  of  calico.  In  the  excitement  of 
paddling  to  escape,  the  injury  done  by  the  musket  was  not 
noticed  by  the  natives  in  the  canoe,  although  detected  by 
Lieutenant  Gore  from  the  ship's  deck,  as  Maru-tu-ahua,  the 
man  shot,  scarcely  altered  his  position.  When  the  canoe 
reached  the  shore,  the  natives  found  their  comrade  sitting 
dead  on  the  stolen  calico,  which  was  stained  with  his  life's 
blood,  the  ball  having  entered  his  back.  Several  chiefs  in- 
vestigated into  the  affair,  and  declared  that  Maru-tu-ahua 
deserved  his  fate ;  that  he  stole  and  was  killed  for  so  doing, 

*  Howitt,  vol.  i.,  pp.  81,  82. 


2o6 


EARLY  AUSTRALASIAN  DISCOVERIES. 


n 


i 

and  that  his  hfo  blood  should  not  be  revenged  on  the 
strangers.  Seeing,  however,  Maru-tu-ahua  had  paid  for 
the  calico  with  his  life,  it  was  not  taken  away  from  him,  but 
was  wrapped  round  his  body  as  a  winding-sheet.  Singular 
to  relate,  Captain  Cook  landed  soon  after  the  murder,  and 
traded  as  if  nothing  had  occurred,  Would  Cook's  ship's 
crew  have  acted  thus  if  one  of  them  had  been  slain  ?'■■' 

From  New  Zealand  Captain  Cook  sailed  northwards  to 
the  Australian  coast,  first  touching  at  the  south-eastern 
extremity,  which  is  now  known  as  Cape  Howe,  but  not 
finding  a  convenient  landing-place  till  they  were  in  Botany 
Bay.  *  While  the  master  was  sounding  the  entrance,'  says 
the  historian,  '  the  ship  lay  off,  and  observed  some  natives 
who  were  upon  the  shore  watching  them.  As  the  vessel 
neared,  they  retired  to  the  top  of  a  little  eminence.  Soon 
after,  the  pinnace,  which  was  employed  in  sounding,  came 
close  to  them,  and  the  natives  did  all  they  could  to  induce 
the  master  to  land.  But  they  were  all  armed  with  "  long 
pikes  and  wooden  scimitars,"  as  the  master  said,  and  there- 
fore ho  returned  to  the  ship.  The  natives,  who  had  not 
followed  the  boat,  seeing  the  ship  approach,  used  many 
threatening  gr  hires,  and  brandished  their  weapons.  They 
were  all  painted  for  battle,  as  the  custom  is  amongst  them. 
The  paint  generally  consists  of  white  pipeclay,  smeared  all 
over  the  face  and  along  the  arms,  across  the  ribs,  and,  in 
fact,  in  every  sort  of  pattern,  making  them  look  exactly  Hke 
skeletons.  The  weapon  like  a  scimitar,  which  was  evidently 
a  boomerang,  they  brandished  most  of  all ;  and  they  seemed, 
says  Cook,  to  talk  to  each  other  wich  great  earnestness. 
Notwithstanding  all  this.  Cook  continued  to  sail  up  the  bay, 
and  early  in  the  afternoon  anchored  under  the  south  shore, 
about  two  miles  within  the  entrance.  As  he  came  in  he 
saw  on  either  side  of  the  bay  a  few  huts,  of  the  usual 
wretched  character  of  the  Australian  dwelling,  and  several 
natives  sitting  near  them.  Under  the  south  head  he  saw 
four  small  canoes,  with  one  man  in  each.  They  were 
*  Thomson,  •  The  Story  of  New  Zealand,'  vol.  i.,  p.  231. 


says 


induce 
"  long 
there- 
ad  not 
many 
They 
them, 
ed  all 
ind,  in 
y  like 
dently 
emed, 
stness. 
le  bay, 
shore, 
in  he 
usual 
everal 
le  saw 
were 


CAPTAIN  COOK  IN  AUSTRALIA. 


2oy 


striknig  fish  with  a  long  spear.  They  ventured  very  near 
the  surf  in  their  fragile  barks  ;  and  were  so  engaged  in  their 
employment  that  they  did  not  see  the  ship  go  by  them, 
though  it  passed  within  a  quarter  of  a  mile.  Opposite  to 
where  the  ship  anchored  there  were  seven  or  eight  huts. 
While  they  were  hauling  out  the  boat,  an  old  woman  and 
three  children  were  seen  to  come  out  of  the  forest  with  fire- 
wood. Several  children  in  the  huts  came  out  to  meet  her 
at  the  same  time.  She  looked  very  attentively  at  the  ship, 
but  did  not  seem  very  anxious  about  it.  She  then  kindled 
a  fire  ;  whereupon  the  four  fishermen  rowed  on  to  the  land, 
hauled  up  their  boats,  and  commenced  to  dress  the  fish  for 
their  meal.  The  ship  did  not  excite  their  astonishment  in 
the  least.  This  apathy  is  one  of  the  most  distinctive  features 
in  the  character  of  the  Australian  savage.  Preparations 
having  been  completed,  the  crew  prepared  to  land.  They 
proposed  doing  so  where  the  huts  were ;  and  hoped  that,  as 
they  cared  so  little  about  the  ship,  the  natives  would  remain 
and  communicate  with  them.  In  this  they  were  disappointed. 
As  soon  as  the  boat  approached  the  rocks,  two  of  the  men 
came  down  to  dispute  the  landing,  and  th(^.  rest  ran  away. 
Each  of  the  two  champions  was  armed  with  a  lance  about 
ten  feet  long,  and  a  woomra,  or  throwing-stick.  They 
brandished  their  weapons  in  a  very  daring  way,  though 
they  were  only  two  to  forty,  and  called  continually,  in  a 
strange  harsh  language,  what  was  evidently  a  warning  to 
the  explorers  not  to  land.  Cook,  admiring  their  courage, 
ordered  his  men  to  lie  upon  the  oars,  while  he  tried  to 
pacify  them.  He  threw  them  beads  and  ornaments,  which 
they  seized  eagerly,  and  seemed  well  pleased  with  them. 
But  all  inducements  to  allow  the  boat's  crew  to  land  were 
thrown  away.  Cook  tried  to  intimate  to  them  that  nothing 
but  water  was  wanted.  But  it  was  no  use ;  they  seemed 
resolved  to  defend  their  country  from  invasion.  One  was  a 
mere  lad,  the  other  about  middle  age  ;  and  yet  there  they 
stood  before  their  huts,  confronting  forty  men,  rather  than 
yield  their  ground.    A  musket  was  fired  between  them.    At 


1 J  ■ 


■J  hi 


: 


1 1 


lii 


I* ! 


ii 


1  ! 


208         EARL  V  A  USTRALASIAN  DISCO  VERIES. 

the  report,  one  dropped  his  bundle  of  spears  ;  but  he  recol- 
lected himself  in  a  moment,  and  stood  again  on  the  defen- 
sive. A  charge  of  small  shot  was  now  fired  at  the  legs  of 
the  elder.  Upon  this  he  retreated  to  the  huts,  and  Cook 
and  his  men  immediately  landed.  But  the  battle  was  not 
over.  Scarcely  had  they  set  their  feet  upon  the  sand  when 
the  savage  returned.  He  was  armed  with  a  shield  this  time, 
hoping  thus  to  protect  his  bleeding  legs.  Both  savages 
threw  spears  where  the  men  stood  thickest,  but  they  easily 
avoided  them.  Another  charge  of  small  shot  was  given; 
and  this  completed  the  victory.  Native  legs  could  stand  it 
no  longer,  so  they  were  immediately  put  to  another  use. 
After  the  retreat  of  the  blacks,  Cook  went  to  the  huts,  and 
found  there  three  or  four  children  huddled  together,  and 
evidently  in  the  greatest  state  of  fear.  This  was  the  cause 
of  the  heroic  resistance  of  the  two  natives.'* 

Captain  Cook  made  some  further  explorations  in  Botany 
Bay ;  but  here,  as  elsewhere  in  the  course  of  his  northward 
voyage,  he  was  regarded  with  sullen  aversion  by  the  natives. 
They  rejected  his  presents ;  and  when  they  did  not  obsti- 
nately oppose  him,  they  avoided  all  intercourse  with  him. 
He  sailed  all  along  the  eastern  shore  of  Australia,  for  the 
first  time  clearly  defining  its  appearance  and  configuration ; 
and,  having  passed  Cape  York,  landed  at  the  curious  rock 
known  as  Booby  Island,  from  one  of  whose  lofty  summits 
he  took  his  last  look  at  Australia.  In  1773  he  returned  to 
New  Zealand,  and  also  visited  Tasmania,  and  to  both  of 
these  islands  he  went  again  in  1777  ;  but  he  added  little,  on 
either  of  these  occasions,  to  the  information  he  had  acquired 
in  his  first  and  most  famous  voyage. 

That  voyage  excited  much  interest  in  Europe,  and  led  to 
many  other  expeditions  to  the  Australasian  regions.  De 
Surville,  a  French  navigator,  had  gone  to  New  Zealand  in 
the  same  year,  1769,  and  treated  its  natives  with  gross 
treachery  and  cruelty ;   and  Marion  du  Fresne,  another 

*  Woods, '  History  of  the  Discovery  and  Exploration  of  Australia,'  vol.  i., 
pp.  39-41. 


le  recol- 
3  defen- 

legs  of 
id  Cook 
was  not 
id  when 
lis  time, 

savages 
jy  easily 
3  given; 
stand  it 
her  use. 
uts,  and 
tier,  and 
he  cause 

L  Botany 

)rthward 

natives. 

ot  obsti- 

ith  him. 

for  the 

|u  ration ; 

us  rock 

lUmmits 

rned  to 

both  of 

ittle,  on 

cquired 

Id  led  to 
18.  De 
iland  in 

|h  gross 
mother 

ia,'  vol.  i., 


CAPTAIN  COOK'S  RIVALS. 


209 


Frenchman,  though  perhaps  with  lesa  intention  of  doing  evil, 
engaged  in  yet  more  disastrous  strife  with  the  aborigines 
both  of  New  Zealand  and  of  Tasmania,  whom  he  visited  in 
1772.  In  1785  La  Perouse  was  sent  by  the  French  Govern- 
ment on  an  intended  voyage  round  the  world,  which  was  to 
surpass  all  previous  exploits  01  that  sort  in  the  value  of  its 
contributions  to  geographical  science  and  natniral  history. 
He  proceeded  as  far  as  Botany  Bay,  where  he  anchored  in 
January,  1788  ;  but  there  ha  disappeared,  and  the  voyages 
undertaken  in  search  of  him  or  his  remains  almost  vie  in 
interest  with  those  by  which,  in  our  own  time,  and  in  very 
different  scenes,  it  was  sought  to  discover  the  fate  of  Sir 
John  Franklin.  But  the  work  of  Australasian  discovery 
was  chiefly  to  be  carried  on  by  Captain  Cook's  own  country- 
men. 


W 


'i\ 


I 


1:i 


*"  til 


■; 


»   li 


;i 


'I 


11;; 


■  «i 

:  El 

■•i 

'if 


ki 


t;l 


14 


f        i 


CIIArTEU  XIX. 


THK    FIKST   AUSTIIALIAN   COLONY. 


ii 


TUF,  CONVICT  SKTTI.EMKNT  IN  NKW  SOmi  WALKS — ITS  FUIST  TUOmi-KS  — 
TllK  KVM,  UAUITS  OK  THK  COLONISTS  -TUK  HKiJINNINc;  OF  HKTTKK  WAYS 
—  COVKUNOK  MACkJUAUlK— Al'STUALIAN  DISCOVKUKUS  :  I'LINOKUS  AND 
BASS— INLAND      KXTKOITIONS— THK    rUOCiUKSS     OK    NEW     SOUTH      WALKS. 

[17{^7-1{>21.] 

N  1723,  not  very  long  after  Danipior's  visit  to  tlio 
distant  country  then  known  as  Now  Holland,  it 
^vas  proposed  that  an  English  colony  should  bo 
there  planted ;  and  tho  proposal  was  revived 
almost  as  soon  as  tho  result  of  Captain  Cook's 
researches  \vas  announced.  But  hiiiglajid,  then  busy  with 
the  defence  of  Canada,  and  with  her  efforts  to  bring  back 
tho  inhabitants  of  the  United  States  to  subjection,  was  not 
ready  to  take  in  hand  tho  beginning  of  a  settlement  in  so 
remote  a  region.  The  American  War,  however,  in  tho  ciul, 
gave  encouragement  to  tho  new  enterprise.  One  use  to 
which  the  now  independent  colonies  had  been  put  was  tho 
sending  thither  a  number  of  criminals,  nearly  two  thousand 
in  every  year,  for  whom  no  room  was  to  be  found  in  tho 
crowded  gaols  at  home ;  and  when  the  old  ways  of  trans- 
portation were  cut  off,  new  ways  had  to  be  discovered. 
Then  it  was  that  it  w^as  resolved  to  make  use  of  Cook's 
discoveries.  In  1784  an  Act  oi  Parliament  was  passed, 
empowering  the  Ministers  of  George  the  Third  to  appoint 
some  place  beyond  the  seas  to  which  offenders  might  bo 


riiE  fvuxDhxc  ()/'•  svi)\/:\ 


21  I 


convoyud  ;  jiikI  in  I7f^l>  it  wjim  (iccidcd  Unit,  l,li(>y  hIioiiM  Ik! 
H(MiLto  tho  oiiHicni  coiiHt  of  New  llollaiid  and  (lio  !M>i''ld)()iii'- 


iiig  1 


ilaiidf 


luiH  tilio  CDloiii/aiioii  of  AiiHiralia  vvmh  Im-'/uii, 


VVitli  ()ai>tain  Aitliur  I'liillip,  li.N.,  an  coiiiiiiandcr  of  Mhi 
ox]MMlil,ioii,  jiikI  f^'ovcM'iior  of  tliu  pmjcK'.l.od  KclilciiHUii,  a 
small  l1(Hit;  left  I'lii^Maiid  on  tlio  l.'ltli  of  May,  I7M7.  On 
board  w(5r«  505  malo  and    \\V1  U\\\\\\\i\  ))riHoiu>rH,  with  iiOH 


ollicors  an 


I  Hold 


lOI'H, 


and  ( 


)5  womcMi  and  cliildrcn.      Aftor  an 


cij^lit  montliH*  voyaj^o,  in  tlin  c.ourHc?  of  wliicli  thirty- two  of 
tho  convictH  diod,  tlu?  convoy  cnttirod  IJotany  I  Jay  in 
.lanuary,  17H<S  ;  but  (laptain  l'hilli|),  not  dcuiniing  tho 
harbour  Hafo  onou^'h,  H.-iilnd  northward  for  a  litthi  diHtanco, 
anil  thuH  reached  Port  .lacknon,  with  Sydney  ()ov(!  cIoh(5  to 
it.  Hero  ho  halted  wdth  Iuh  ])arty  of  convictH,  and  their 
guardn  and  BorvantH,  on  the  'Jdth  of  .lainiary.  A  few  rude 
buildingH  wore  put  to^'ether  ;  and  early  in  March  the  un- 
willing colonists  were  hinded,  and  employed  in  the  conntruc- 
tiou  of  a  moro  peniument  homo  in  Mew  South  WaloH,  as  it 
was  called. 

Tho  work  was  not  easy,  as  tlie  colonists  liad  no  liking  for 
it.  They  took  every  opj)ortunity  of  escaj)ing,  and  were 
caught  with  diHiculty,  if  caught  at  all.  Nund>ers  perished 
ill  the  woods  from  hung(U',  or  ])y  the  hands  of  the,  natives. 
Others,  without  ruiming  away,  were  too  idle  to  In;  of  use, 
and  severe  measures  had  to  bo  resorted  to,  l)y  which  tlu; 
whole  progress  of  the  settlement  was  hindered.  Tho  town 
of  Sydney  was  slowly  built  ;  but  the  crops  planted  on  the 
rugged  soil  were  not  properly  tended,  and  the  cattle  l)i'ought 
out  from  ]'jngland  were  recklessly  killed  or  lost.  A  ship, 
intended  to  proceed  to  China  for  suppli(;s,  was  wrecked,  a/id 
another,  coming  with  ample  store  of  provisions  from  J'^ngland, 
was  lost  on  tho  way  out.  By  these  misfortunes  the  colony 
was  brought  almost  to  starvation.  Many  died.  Fresh  cargoes 
of  convicts  arrived  at  intervals  ;  but  the  food  that  caujo  with 
them  did  not  suHico  for  the  wants  of  tho  older  colonists  as 
well  as  those  for  whom  it  was  intenufjd.  The  first  live  years 
passed  painfully,  and  tho  settlement  of  New  South  Wales 

id— 2 


>i 


I 

lO 

5 

•  *i       1 

!J 

1  V 

[ 

:i]    : 

■i 

• 

f 

1  *•  • 

'.\ 

• 

■ 

^nl 

■ 

3N 

'ii 

4  MM 

i*<|!'  1 

!■: 

f'v'' 

Vl<^| 

|i  |H 

t||l 

|| 

8«* 

/ 

1 

1 
i 

1 

!■ 

i: 

IH 


W 


1' 

1 

.1 
1 

nr 

'11 


j'i 


K 


u 


II 


212 


THE  FIRST  AUSTRALIAN  COLONY. 


was  only  saved  from  destruction  by  the  exemplary  zeal  and 
forbearance  of  the  governor.  By  him  the  flagging  spirits  of 
the  colonists  were  quickened  ;  disaffection  was  stayed  in  a 
community  especially  fitted  to  become  mutinous,  and  his 
constant  self-sacrifice  endeared  him  to  all  alike,  and  pro- 
moted union  among  all.  He  even  sought  to  civihze  the 
stubborn  natives ;  and,  when  this  was  found  impracticable, 
succeeded  in  preventing  his  people  from  acting  towards 
them  with  the  cruelty  and  injustice  too  often  shown  by 
colonists  in  their  dealings  with  inferior  races. 

Captain  Phillip  returned  to  England  in  1792.  By  that 
time  the  early  troubles  of  the  colony  had  been  in  great 
measure  overcome.  The  fields  were  in  cultivation;  herds 
had  been  naturalized,  and  supplies  of  provisions  came  from 
Europe  with  tolerable  regularity.  These  supplies  from 
Europe,  however — not  merely  articles  of  general  commerce 
to  be  exchanged  for  Australian  produce,  but  stores  of  food 
and  clothing  for  which  no  return  was  made — were  necessary 
to  the  colony,  both  then  and  for  long  after.  It  was  a  convict 
settlement,  not  expected  to  be  self-supporting,  although  it 
was  hoped  that  the  prisoners  would  be  gradually  induced  to 
contribute  more  and  more  to  their  own  maintenance.  And 
it  continued  to  be  little  more  than  a  convict  settlement,  to  a 
great  extent  unproductive,  until  1821. 

Its  history  up  to  that  time,  during  a  period  of  thirty-three 
years  in  all,  was  marked  by  many  painful  details.  Its 
governors,  after  Captain  Phillip,  were  military  and  naval 
men,  employed  chiefly  in  seeing  that  the  unwiUing  colonists 
performed  their  task-work,  and  in  attempting  to  maintain 
something  like  prison  discipline  in  a  prison  thirty  times  as 
large  as  the  island  of  Great  Britain.  All  that  prison  was 
not  then  habitable  by  white  men.  A  vast  proportion  of  it 
was  wholly  unexplored.  The  settlement  of  New  South 
Wales  comprised  only  a  very  small  part  of  the  colony 
now  bearing  that  name,  and  was  comprised  within  the 
immediate  neighbourhood  of  Sydney  and  Botany  Bay.  But 
the  great  districts  north,  west,  and  south  afforded  easy 


eal  and 
pirits  of 
ed  in  a 
and  his 
,nd  pro- 
lize  the 
cticable, 
towards 
lown  by 

By  that 
in  great 
a;  herds 
ime  from 
ies  from 
ommerce 
s  of  food 
lecessary 
a  convict 
ihough  it 
iduced  to 
ce.     And 
lent,  to  a 

irty-threc 
ails.     Its 
,nd  naval 
colonists 
maintain 
times  as 
rison  was 
tion  of  it 
iw  South 
colony 
thin  the 
ay.    But 
ded  easy 


ITS  CONVICT  POPULATION. 


213 


means  for  the  escape  of  convicts  from  the  garrison  in  charge 
of  them ;  and  while  many  thus  escaped,  generally  to  die,  or 
be  for  ever  lost  sight  of,  the  task  of  restraining  tliem  was  a 
constant  source  of  trouble,  and  added  greatly  to  the  ditli- 
culties  in  the  way  of  good  government  among  the  convicts 
who  remained.  It  gave  them  a  certain  power  over  their 
masters,  since,  to  keep  them  from  running  away,  they  were 
allowed  much  licence  which  ought  to  have  been  avoided. 
Their  governors  must  not  be  blamed  too  severely  for  their 
failures  in  doing  work  that  it  was  hardly  possible  to  do  well. 


But   their    failures   were   often 


egregious. 


Arrogant    and 


despotic  in  some  of  their  actions,  they  were  culpably  lenient 
in  others.  The  murderers,  forgers,  and  convicts  guilty  of  a 
hundred  different  offences,  who  formed  the  bulk  of  the 
colonists,  and  who,  if  they  began  to  settle  down  into  peace- 
able ways,  were  every  year  contaminated  by  fresh  tides  of 
criminals,  formed  a  lawless  and  disreputable  community. 
Vice  was  nearly  everywhere  rampant.  Men  exiled  from 
England  for  their  crimes  were  often  entrusted  with  functions 
for  which  virtue  was  pre-eminently  needed.  Convicts  became 
judges  and  clergymen.  The  leaders  of  society  were  often 
men  whose  violation  of  social  laws  had  been  so  gross  that 
they  could  not  be  tolerated  in  the  mother  country  ;  and,  as 
a  consequence,  nearly  every  sort  of  dishonesty  was  the  rule, 
and  none  but  the  honest  were  punished.  Licentiousness 
and  drunkenness,  parents  of  every  sort  of  evil,  were  almost 
universal.  *  Not  only,'  we  are  told,  '  was  undisguised  con- 
cubinage thought  no  shame,  but  the  sale  of  wives  was  not 
an  unfrequent  practice.  A  present  owner  of  broad  acres 
and  large  herds  i,n  New  South  Wales  is  the  offspring  of  a 
union  strangely  brought  about  by  the  purchase  of  a  wife 
from  her  husband  for  four  gallons  of  rum.  Rum  supplied 
the  place  of  coin.  Lands,  houses,  and  property  of  every 
description,  real  and  personal,  were  bought  and  paid  for  in 
rum.  It  is  recorded  of  one  of  the  officers  of  the  102nd 
Eegiment  that,  a  hundred  acres  of  land  having  been  dis- 
tributed in  half-acre  allotments  as  free  grants  amongst  some 


!,  m 


J. 


m 


214 


THE  FIRST  AUSTRALIAN  COLONY. 


soldiers  of  the  regiment,  he  planted  a  hogshead  of  rum 
upon  the  ground,  and  bought  the  wliole  hundred  acres  with 
the  contents  of  the  hogshead.  A  moiety  of  this  land,  a 
few  years  ago,  realized  £20,000  at  a  sale  in  Sydney.'* 

That  these  evils  should  have  prevailed  during  the  first 
period  of  New  South  Wales  colonization  is  not  to  be  won- 
dered at  so  much  as  that  they  should  so  soon  have  begun  to 
be  corrected.  Tlio  era  of  reformation  commenced  in  1808, 
when  Captain  Bligli,  the  most  incompetent  of  the  early 
governors,  was  expelled  by  the  best  of  the  colonists,  the 
special  cause  of  this  rough  act  of  justice  being  his  harsh 
treatment  of  the  vorthiest  colonist  of  all,  John  Macarthur, 
to  whom  is  due  the  merit  of  first  discerning  the  value  of 
Australia  as  a  wool-producing  country.  By  him  sheep  were 
first  imported  in  1797  ;  and  in  1803  he  improved  the  breed 
by  purchases  from  the  flocks  of  King  George  the  Third  at 
Kew.  His  zeal  and  that  of  his  wife  for  the  improvement  of 
New  South  Wales  in  other  ways  besides  sheep-rearing 
brought  on  him  much  persecution  ;  but  he  and  his  friends 
were  supported  by  the  authorities  in  England,  and  a  better 
governor,  General  Macquarie,  was  sent  in  1810  to  rule  the 
colony  for  eleven  years. 

Governor  Macquarie  established  some  sort  of  order  among 
his  convicts.  He  rewarded  all  who  were  worth  rewarding, 
and  employed  them,  in  the  several  crafts  in  which  they  had 
been  trained  in  England,  thus  raising  up  an  army  of  artisans, 
engineers,  and  other  useful  labourers.  Under  his  directions 
Sydney  was  nearly  rebuilt  ;  hospitals,  churches,  and  other 
public  buildings  were  erected,  roads  and  bridges  were  con- 
structed, and  the  whole  colony  was  extended  and  enriched. 
'  He  found  a  garrison  and  a  gaol,'  it  was  said,  '  and  left  the 
broad  and  deep  foundations  of  an  empire.'! 

Other  men  joined  in  that  work.  In  1821  the  population 
of  New  South  Wales  was  29,783,  of  whom  the  great  propor- 

*  Therry,   '  Reminiscences  of  Thirty  Years*  Residence  in  New  South 
Wales  and  Victoria'  (1863),  pp.  71,  72. 
+  Ihid.y  p.  79. 


)f  rum 
)S  with 
and,  a 

10  first 
3  won- 
)gim  to 
1  1808, 
3  early 
its,  the 
I  harsh 
arthur, 
alue  of 
3p  were 
3  breed 
hird  at 
Tient  of 
•rearing 
I  friends 
better 
ule  the 

among 
arding, 
ley  had 
rtisans, 
ections 
i  other 
re  con- 
riched. 
eft  the 

ulation 
)ropor- 

kv  South 


ITS  EARLY  GROWTH. 


215 


tion  wero  convicts,  either  still  undergoing  punishment,  or 
'  emancipists,'  as  they  wero  called,  being  now  in  tho  main 
free  men.  But  some  of  these  wore  persons  of  high  character 
and  great  ability  ;  and  in  the  colony  there  were  also  many 
free  settlers,  John  Macarthur  being  tho  chief,  of  remarkable 
worth.  By  them  the  resources  of  tho  colony,  were  being 
rapidly  unfolded,  and  farm  settlements  wero  already  planted 
at  a  considerable  distance  from  Sydney. 

From  Sydney,  too,  had  gone  forth,  during  these  throe-and- 
thirty  years,  numerous  expeditions  for  the  investigation  of 
more  distant  portions  of  Australia  and  tho  neighbouring 
islands,  all  destined  soon  to  become  fruitful  colonies.  Cap- 
tain Phillip,  the  first  governor,  had  sent  out  naval  exploring 
parties  both  by  land  and  by  watei- ;  and  if  his  successors  in 
the  government  were  less  energetic,  there  were  not  wanting 
private  adventurers  to  carry  on  the  work.  The  foremost  of 
these  adventurers,  tie  great  heroes  of  Australasian  discovery, 
were  Flinders  and  Ba3S. 

Flinders  was  a  young  midshipman,  Bass  was  a  navy 
surgeon,  when  in  1795  they  resolved  to  use  all  the  leisure 
they  could  get  from  their  duties  on  board  the  Bcliance  in 
examining  the  vast  coasts  and  waters  that  had  only  hitherto 
been  vaguely  described  by  Dampier,  Cook,  and  other 
voyagers.  They  bought  a  little  boat,  eight  feet  long,  which 
they  named  the  Tom  Thumbs  and  which,  with  the  help  of  a 
boy,  they  were  able  to  manage  for  themselves.  They 
managed  her  so  well,  in  1795  and  1796,  in  surveying  the 
coast  and  country  near  to  Sydney,  that  the  fame  of  their 
achievements  led  to  their  being  entrusted  with  larger  boats 
and  permitted  to  engage  in  more  extensive  voyages.  Some- 
times together  and  sometimes  apart,  they  persevered  in  their 
bold  exploits,  as  often  as  1'  :^ir  professional  duties  and  other 
circumstances  allowed. 

In  1797  Bass,  in  charge  of  a  whale-boat,  sailed  south- 
wards from  Port  Jackson  to  Cape  Howe,  and  then,  passing 
westwards,  discovered  "Wilson's  Promontory  and  Western 
Port,  with  many  creeks   and  islands   lying  between  the 


% 


II 


II  m 


■       t       i  : 


itlU 


2l6 


THE  FIRST  AUSTRALIAN  COLONY. 


\\\\\ 


11" 


Australian  coast  and  Van  Dicmen's  Land,  which,  instead 
of  being  a  pait  of  the  continent,  as  had  hitherto  been  sup- 
posed, was  tlnis  proved  to  bo  an  island  divided  from  it  by 
the  waters  called  Bass  Straits,  in  honour  of  the  exnlorer. 
Forced  by  want  of  provisions  to  turn  back  in  February, 
1798,  he  found  that  Flinders  had,  during  the  same  time, 
been  also  exploring  in  nearly  the  same  quarter,  and  dis- 
covering several  islands  north  of  Van  Diemen's  Land.  In 
September,  1798,  the  two  friends  were  allowed  to  continue 
their  researches  in  a  larger  vessel.  They  sailed  right  through 
the  straits  and  all  round  Tasmania,  and  examined  its 
principal  bays.  Then  the  friends  were  parted.  Soon  after 
his  return  to  Sydney,  Bass  started  for  England,  on  a  visit 
to  his  wife  and  mother,  but  the  vessel  in  which  ho  sailed 
appears  to  have  been  wrecked  on  the  way  home.  He  was 
never  heard  of  afterwards. 

Flinders  lived  to  achieve  greater  successes.  He  made 
many  voyages  along  coasts  already  roughly  marked  out, 
but  W'hich  ho  was  the  first  to  define  with  precision.  Other 
voyagv^.s  were  attended  by  more  memorable  discoveries.  In 
1801  and  1802,  as  commander  of  the  Investigator,  he  sailed 
along  the  southern  coast  of  Australia,  past  Kangaroo  Island, 
to  the  Great  Australian  Bight.  Then  turning  back  he  sur- 
veyed more  carefully  the  bays  and  coasts  of  what  are  now 
the  provinces  of  South  Australia  and  Victoria,  loitering  long 
in  the  splendid  harbour  on  which  Melbourne  was  soon  to 
be  built.  He  nex'  after  refitting  at  Sydney,  proceeded  in  a 
different  direction.  Sailing  northwards,  he  investigated  the 
coast  with  the  same  care  which  he  had  shown  in  his  previous 
work,  until  he  entered  the  Gulf  of  Carpentaria.  A  hundred 
and  five  days  were  spent  by  him  in  examining  this  great 
bay  and  discovering  its  islands ;  and  at  the  end  of  that  time 
he  was  forced,  by  the  sickness  of  many  of  his  crew,  to  make 
his  way  back  to  Sydney. 

In  July,  1803,  he  started  upon  another  expedition ;  but 
the  loss  of  one  of  the  two  vessels  entrusted  to  him  forced 
him  to  return.    In  September  he  sailed  out  again,  intend- 


EXPLORATIONS  AND  EXPANSIONS, 


317 


infj  to  visit  England,  report  his  discovories,  and  seek  assist- 
ance for  yet  more  extensive  enterprises.     lie  was  not,  hovv- 


tli 


Callini;  at  Muuriti 


h 


tak 


ever,  to  engaj;o  in  tneni.  uaiinig  at  Mauritius,  ne  was  taKen 
prisoner  by  its  French  governor,  and  there  detained  for  six 
years  and  a  half.  Ilis  charts  were  seized,  and  many  of  his 
most  important  discoveries  falsely  claimed  for  .the  French 
explorer.  Captain  Baudin.  Enabled  at  length  to  reach 
England,  he  found  that  the  credit  of  his  greatest  exploits 
had  been  taken  from  him,  and  that  ho  himself  was  forgotten. 
That  justice  might  be  done  to  liim,  he  lost  no  time  in  sotting 
his  journals  in  order  for  publication.  lie  died  on  the  very 
day  on  which  this  work  was  completed,  in  1814. 

In  the  interval  use  had  been  made  of  his  researches  by 
the  planting  of  several  small  settlements  in  various  parts  of 
New  South  Wales  ;  but  there  were  no  further  explorations 
of  much  importance  for  several  years,  and  then  the  explora- 
tion was  on  laud  instead  of  by  sea.  In  1813  a  party  of 
adventurers,  led  by  William  Charles  Went  worth,  William 
Lawson,  and  Gregory  Blaxland,  crossed  the  Blue  Mountains, 
thus  taking  the  first  step  towards  an  understanding  of  the 
interior  of  the  continent ;  and  as  a  sequel  to  their  pioneer- 
ing, the  town  of  Bathurst  was  founded  in  1814,  by  Governor 
Macquarie,  who  employed  his  convicts  in  constructing  a 
road  between  the  new  settlement  and  Sydney.  Thence 
other  expeditions  set  out,  and  by  them  were  discovered  the 
Macquarie,  the  Lachlan,  and  other  rivers.  John  Oxley  was 
the  first  great  traveller  by  land  ;  and  his  painstaking  excur- 
sions from  Bathurst  to  the  country  round  about,  and  far 
inland,  helped  to  make  clear  the  nature  of  the  inner  districts 
of  the  New  South  Wales  province. 

Thus  before  the  close  of  the  year  1821,  when  the  colony 
entered  on  a  new  period  of  growth,  much  progress  had  been 
made  in  the  mapping  out  of  the  great  eastern  half  of 
Australia,  though  the  western  coasts  and  districts  had  been 
hardly  visited,  and  of  the  central  parts  nothing  at  all  was 
known.  Sydney,  on  the  southern  shore  of  Port  Jackson, 
and  Paramatta,  fourteen  miles  inland,  were  the  only  settle- 


8l8 


THE  FIRST  AUSTRALIAN  COLONY. 


ments  then  worthy  to  be  called  towns ;  and  hardly  more 
than  fifty  square  miles  of  land  were  under  cultivation, 
though  an  area  about  ten  times  as  large  was  used  for 
pasturage.  That,  however,  was  four  times  as  much  as  it 
had  been  in  1810.  In  1788  there  were  in  the  colony  only 
7  horses,  7  horned  cattle,  and  29  sheep,  the  first  imports 
from  Europe.  In  1810  the  numbers  respectively  had  risen 
to  1,114,  to  11,276,  and  to  34,550;  in  1820  they  were  4,014, 
G8,149,  and  119,777.  In  1807  only  245  pounds  of  wool  had 
been  exported  from  New  South  Wales;,  in  1816  the  quantity 
was  73,171  pounds;  and  in  1821,  175,433  pounds. 

The  little  colony  in  the  far-off  island  continent  was  already 
in  the  highway  of  progress,  and  deserved  the  praises  of  its 
first  local  poet,  the  young  explorer  Wentworth — destined  to 
be  one  of  its  greatest  statesmen — who  exclaimed  : 


nm 


I 


n 


*  Lo  !  thickly  planted  o'er  the  glassy  bay, 
Where  Sydney  loves  her  beauties  to  survey^ 
And  every  morn  delighted  see  the  beam 
Of  some  fresh  pennant  dancing  in  her  stream, 
A  masty  forest,  stranger  vessels  moor, 
Charged  with  the  fruits  of  every  foreign  shore  ; 
While,  landward,  the  thronged  quay,  the  creaking  crane, 
The  noisy  workman,  and  the  loaded  wain, 
The  lengthened  street,  wi(' j  square,  and  columned  front 
Of  stately  mansions,  and  the  gushing  font. 
The  solemn  church,  and  busy  market  throng, 
And  idle  loungers  saunioiing  slow  among, 
The  lofty  windmills  that  with  outspread  sail 
Thick  line  the  hills,  and  court  the  rising  gale, 
Show  that  the  mournful  genius  of  the  plain. 
Driven  from  his  primal  solitary  reign, 
Has  backward  fled,  and  fixed  his  drowsy  throne 
In  untrod  wilds  to  muse  and  brood  alone. 

»  #  *  *  » 

Here  lowing  kine,  there  bounding  coursers  graze  ; 
Here  waves  the  corn,  and  there  the  woody  maize  ; 
Here  the  tall  peach  puts  forth  its  pinky  bloom, 
And  there  the  orange  scatters  its  perfume  ; 
While,  as  the  merry  boatmen  row  along, 
The  woods  are  quickened  with  their  lusty  song. 
«  *  *  ♦  ♦ 

The  crowded  farmhouse  lines  the  winding  stream 
On  either  side,  and  many  a  plodding  team 
With  shining  ploughshare  turns  the  neighbouring  soil, 
Which  crowns  with  double  crop  the  labourer's  toil.' 


ly  more 
;ivatioii, 
ised  for 
ch  as  it 
ny  only 
imports 
ad  risen 
•e  4,014, 
irool  had 
^[uantity 

1  already 
es  of  its 
itined  to 


Une, 
>nt 


ADVANCING  CIVILIZATION. 


219 


In  the  same  poem  Wentworth  alluded,  with  pardonable 
pride,  to  his  own  scaling  of  the  Blue  Mountains,  and  explora- 
uons  beyond,  in  1813. 

*  Hail,  mighty  ridge  !  that  from  thy  azure  brow 
Survey'st  these  fertile  plains  that  stretch  below, 
And  look'st  with  careless,  unobservant  eye, 
As  round  thy  waist  the  forked  lightnings  ply,       . 
And  the  loud  thunders  spring  with  hoarse  rebound 
From  peak  to  peak,  and  fill  Vn^.  welkin  round 
With  deafening  voice,  till,  with  their  boisterous  play 
Fatigued,  in  muttering  peals  they  stalk  away. 
Vast  Austral  giant  of  these  rugged  steeps, 
Within  those  secret  cells  rich  glittering  heaps, 
Thick  piled,  are  doomed  to  sleep  till  some  one  spy 
The  hidden  key  that  opes  thy  treasury. 
Now  mute,  how  desolate  thy  stunted  woods  ! 
How  dread  thy  chasms,  where  many  an  eagle  broods  ! 
How  dark  thy  caves  !  how  lone  thy  torrents'  roar — 
As  down  thy  cliffs  precipitous  they  pour — 
Broke  on  our  hearts,  when  first  with  venliurous  tread 
We  dared  to  rouse  thee  from  thy  mountain  bed, 
Till,  gained  with  toilsome  steps  thy  rocky  heath, 
We  spied  the  cheering  smoke  ascend  beneath. 
And,  as  a  meteor  shoots  athwart  the  night. 
The  boundless  champaign  burst  vipon  our  sight, 
Till,  nearer  seen,  the  beauteous  landscape  grew, 
Opening  like  Canaan  on  rapt  Israel's  view.'* 

Wentworth's  reference  to  the  '  rich  glittering  heaps,' 
awaiting  the  finding  of  '  the  hidden  key  that  opes  the 
treasury,'  was  a  remarkable  prophecy  concerning  the 
mineral  wealth,  gold,  silver,  and  copper,  discovered  long 
afterwards  on  the  other  side  of  the  Blue  Mountains. 

*  Wentworth,  born  at  Norfolk  Island  in  1791,  was  only  twenty  two 
when  he  crossed  the  Blue  Mountains.  He  came  to  England,  and  studied 
at  Cambridge  University,  where  '  Australasia,'  quoted  from  above,  was 
written  in  1816,  as  a  prize  poem.  He  was  beaten  in  the  competition,  how- 
ever, by  William  Mackworth  Praed.  He  returned  to  Sydney  in  1824,  and 
was  a  zealous  promoter  of  Australian  interests  till  1862,  when  he  came  to 
spend  the  last  ten  years  of  his  life  in  England. 


*'i 


f 


il 


3! 


; ! 


w 

nil! 


't 


11 


m 


•  f  ,  ill!  1  1  ,^        , 

j  1    f    '\ 

1        .  i 

) 


t 


1  : 
I 

)       ! 


CHAPTEE  XX. 


OLD   NEW   SOUTH    WALES. 


i   i- 


i     :    t 


iMI! 

'■ 

(   ' 

il    : 

1        1i 

1 

^1 

1 

PROGRESS  OF  NEW  SOUTH  WALES  AS  A  FREE  COLONY— SERVICES  OF 
REFORMED  CONVICTS — JOHN  MACA^THUR  AND  THE  WOOL-TRADE — SYDNEY 
IN  1829 — CRUEL  TREATMENT  OF  THE  CONVICTS — GROWTH  01  '  lilsiE  INSTI- 
TUTIONS— SIR  RICHARD  BOURKE — DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  COLONY— EX- 
PLORATIONS IN  THE  INTERIOR  —  THE  ABORIGINES  OF  AUSTRALIA. 
[1821-1839.] 


EW  SOUTH  WALES  was  little  more  than  a  con- 
vict settlement  till  1821,  and,  up  to  that  time, 
its  limits  did  not  extend  very  far  beyond  the 
outskirts  of  Sydney.  Farms  dotted  the  country 
round ;  a  settlement  had  been  begun  inland,  at 
Bathurst ;  and  other  settlements  had  been  begun  along  the 
coast,  from  Port  Macquarie,  in  the  north,  to  Port  Phillip, 
now  Melbourne,  in  the  south.  But  its  population  of  aboat 
20,000  convicts,  9,000  soldiers  and  afew  free  men  andwoiijo.;, 
most  of  whom  gained  their  living  by  attending  to  the  neces- 
sities of  the  convicts,  was  chiefly  to  be  found  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Port  Jackson.  Governor  Macquarie,  who  had 
ruled  the  settlement  wisely,  as  an  overseer  of  a  very  exten- 
sive prison,  had  done  his  best  to  turn  his  lawless  subjects 
into  good  colonists,  but  had  discouraged  the  coming  of 
voluntary  emigrants  among  them.  By  his  successor.  Sir 
Thomas  Brisbane,  and  the  home  authoriticE  who  guided 
him,  a  different  policy  was  adopted  ;  and  from  his  time  the 
population  of  Australia  began  to  be  rapidly  augmented  by 


«A»mM<Mk»»^^ 


RVICES     OF 
E — HTDNEV 

i;;^-E  iNSTi- 

LONY— EX- 
AUSTRALIA. 


,n  a  cou- 

at  time, 

ond  the 

country 

land,  at 

ong  the 

PhilHp, 

>f  abc.it 

womcii, 

3  neces- 

neigh- 

ho  had 

'  exten- 

ubjects 

ning  of 

or,  Sh' 

guided 

me  the 

Lted  by 


CONVICTS  AND  FREE  SETTLERS. 


221 


settlers  of  all  classes,  who  souglit,  with  wonderful  success, 
to  share  the  advantages  afforded  by  this  new  and  almost 
boundless  field  for  enterprise. 

In  1821  the  convicts  formed  more  than  two-thirds  of  the 
whole  population  of  29,783.  In  18'^8  they  were  hardly 
more  than  half  of  the  whole  number,  which  had  risen  to 
36,589.  In  1833  they  were  only  about  a  third  ©f  the  71,070 
persons  then  in  the  colony.  In  1839,  when  there  were 
114,386  inhabitants,  they  were  less  than  a  fourth  ;  and,  after 
that,  further  transportation  being  nearly  abolished  in  1839, 
they  gradually  disappeared  altogether,  save  that,  as  '  eman- 
cipists,' or  liberated  convicts,  they  continued  to  leaven  the 
entire  mass. 

During  those  eighteen  years  New  South  Wales  was  thus 
in  a  state  of  transition.  Its  rapid  growth  of  population, 
and  the  energy  of  the  new-comers,  naturally  superior  to  the 
earlier  and  involuntary  importations,  caused  a  very  great 
increase  of  its  limits,  and  a  corresponding  increase  of  its 
wealth.  The  vices  planted  in  the  beginning  were  not  easily 
eradicated,  but  virtues  flourished  beside  them,  and  the  old 
haunt  of  infamy  was  gradually  turned  into  a  fruitful  garden 
of  honest  enterprise.  The  evil  propensities  of  the  criminals 
with  whom  the  colony  was  stocked  by  the  mother  country, 
no  longer  allowed  supremacy  in  the  towns  and  outlying 
settlements,  led  their  possessors  to  seek  a  precarious  living, 
and  sometimes  large  fortunes,  as  bush-rangers,  until  the 
progress  of  civilized  habits,  and  the  strengthening  of  the 
agencies  of  justice,  put  an  end  to  even  this  dangerous  class, 
and  law  prevailed  everywhere,  or  at  least  with  as  wide  and 
vigorous  a  sway  as  in  any  other  resort  of  Englishmen. 

The  rapidity  with  which  this  reformation  was  effected, 
indeed,  was  a  marvel  to  all,  and  reflects  high  honour  upon 
the  colonists  who  brought  it  about ;  and  especial  honour  is 
due  to  many  of  the  former  convicts,  who,  while  some  of 
their  comrades  found  exercise  for  their  old  habits  as  bush- 
rangers, won  back  the  good  names  they  had  forfeited,  and 
attained  eminence   as  honest  men  and   wise  philanthro- 


i     i 


m 


;( 


-  I 

'5 


'I 


:  r 


IF  li 
1  .)  I 


■ 


222 


OLD  NEW  SOUTH  WALES. 


!■  I 


s; 


1  * 


li 


■  R  i 


t  i 


1 1  • 


II! 


pists.     *  They  form,'  it  was  said  in  1844,  by  a  local  historian, 
*  no  uninteresting  part  of  the  population.     Feeling  that  they 
had  a  bad  character  to  lose  and  a  good  one  to  gain,  they 
have  in  many  instances  set  themselves  about  the  work  of 
reformation.     Some  of  them  are  reckoned  among  our  most 
honourable  tradesmen   and  merchants ;    among  the  most 
liberal  supporters,  too,  of  the  benevolent  institutions  which 
adorn  our  land.     Some  of  these  institutions  have  been  all 
but  entirely  founded,  and  are  now  mainly  supported,  by 
their  means.     In  many  cases  they  have,  by  their  industry 
and  perseverance,  acquired  considerable  wealth ;    and  in 
most  instances  the  wealth  thus  obtained  has  been  generously 
and  honourably  devoted  to  the  public  benefit,  the  real  and 
substantial  advancement  of  this  land  of  their  expatriation. 
Nor  do  we  know  a  more  pleasing  trait  in  human  character 
than  that  which  is  thus  displayed.     Once  degraded,  they 
have  paid  to  a  violated  law  the  satisfaction  it  imperatively 
demanded.   But  when  the  debt  was  paid,  another  obligation 
was  felt  to  remain  behind.     Society  had  lost  that  beneficial 
influence  which  each  member  is  called  upon  to  exercise,  and 
to  atone  for  this  was  now  their  honourable  desire.     In  the 
fair  and  honest  pursuit  of  commerce,  by  untiring  industry, 
they  acquired  those  means  which  enabled  them  to  gratify 
their  wish ;   and  no  sooner  was  wealth  poured  into  their 
lap  than  they  gave  it  back,  spreading  it  through  numerous 
channels,  through  each  of  which,  as  it  flowed,  it  left  bless- 
ings that  even  succeeding  ages  may  enjoy.'* 

If '  there  is  more  joy  in  heaven  over  one  sinner  that  re- 
penteth  thpn  over  ninety  and  nine  just  persons  that  need  no 
repentance,'  hearty  praise  is  due  on  earth  to  those  reformed 
criminals  who  aided  in  the  good  work  by  which  Australia, 
at  one  time  thought  to  be  only  a  vast  playground  for  evil 
passions,  has  been  turned  into  one  of  the  most  luxuriant 
fields  of  honest  and  honourable  enterprise.  '  Why  we  are 
to  erect  penitentiaries  and  prisons  at  the  distance  of  half  the 
diameter  of  the  globe,  and  to  incur  the  enormous  expense  of 
*  Braim,  'History  of  New  South  Wales,'  vol.  ii.,  pp.  315,  316. 


<^«^^ar«MOj»»an-»M>^ 


IN  THE  IVA  V  OF  PROGRESS. 


listorian, 
hat  they 
lin,  they 
work  of 
)ur  most 
he  most 
IS  which 
been  all 
rted,  by 
industry 

and  in 
nerously 
real  and 
triation. 
baracter 
3d,  they 
5ratively 
)ligation 
3neficial 
iise,  and 

In  the 
idustry, 

gratify 

0  their 
merous 
i  bless- 

lat  re- 
eed  no 
brmed 
tralia, 
Dr  evil 
uriant 
ve  are 
ilf  the 
nse  of 


223 


feeding  and  transporting  its  inhabitants,'  it  was  said  in  1803, 
*  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  discover.  It  is  foolishly  believed 
that  the  colony  of  Botany  Bay  unites  our  moral  and  com- 
mercial interests,  and  that  we  shall  receive  hereafter  an 
ample  equivalent  in  the  bales  of  goods  for  all  the  vices  we 
export.'*  The  'foolish  belief  has  been  verified  beyond  the 
most  sanguine  anticipations  of  its  holders. 

This,  however,  could  hardly  have  been  but  for  the  tide  of 
free  emigration,  which,  slowly  ebbing  before,  set  in  with  a 
continued  and  ever-increasing  vehemence  in  1821.  Shrewd 
colonists  like  John  Macarthur,  the  first  sheer  *armer  and 
wool-merchant  of  Australia,  who  has  been  already  mentioned, 
set  a  fashion  which  thousands  every  year  have  followed  to 
their  own  and  others'  great  advantage.  In  1803  this  '  father 
of  the  colony,'  as  he  was  justly  callea,  returned  to  England 
with  the  first  small  sample  of  Australian  wool,  and  earned  the 
mockery  of  many  who  heard  his  prophecy,  that  *  the  quantity 
and  quality  would  so  increase  and  improve,  as  at  no  distant 
time  to  render  England  altogether  independent,  not  only  of 
Spain,  but  of  all  the  nations  cf  the  Continent,  for  its  supply.' 
He  persevered  in  his  *  wool-gathering  theories,'  as  they  were 
termed,  brought  sheep  from  India  and  the  Cape,  and  after- 
wards from  Spain  and  England — being  enabled  to  do  the 
latter,  in  violation  of  a  law  against  the  import  of  these 
animals,  by  a  special  Treasury  warrant,  and  found  that  the 
soil  and  climate  of  Australia  made  bad  fleeces  good,  and 
good  ones  better.  He  obtained  a  grant  of  5,000  acres  of 
land  on  which  to  try  his  experiment ;  and  when  in  1821 
that  was  well  stocked,  5,000  other  acres  were  assigned  to 
him.  In  1807  Austraha  exported  245  pounds  of  wool.  In 
1834,  when  he  died,  the  exports  amounted  to  2,246,933 
pounds,  of  which  no  small  portion  came  from  his  own  well- 
ordered  sheep-runs ;  and  in  1839  they  had  risen  to  7,213,584 
pounds,  valued  at  £442,504. 

That  rapid  development  of  the  wool-trade  in  New  South 
Wales  caused  the  chief  energies  of  the  colony  to  be  applied 

*  Edinburgh  Review. 


If  i'l 


n 


)    ; 


224 


OLD  NEW  SOUTH  WALES. 


w\ 


in  sheep-farming  and  the  associated  caUings.  There  was 
some  exportation  of  cedar  and  other  woods,  and  a  consider- 
able trade  in  whale-oil  and  seal-skins  obtained  in  the  neigh- 
bouring fisheries.  But  all  these  employments  w^ere  chiefly 
carried  on  within  a  short  distance  from  Sydney  ;  and  at  this 
time  it  and  its  outskirts  comprised  nearly  half  of  the  entire 
white  population  of  Australia. 

Of  the  bright  and  painful  aspects  of  the  capital  in  1829, 
when  it  contained  about  15,000  inhabitants,  we  havo  a  vivid 
description.  '  In  the  evening  of  the  day  of  our  arrival,'  says 
a  traveller,  *  I  was  very  favourably  impressed.  The  streets 
were  wide,  well  laid  out,  and  clean.  Two  regiments,  their 
headquarters  stationed  in  Sydney,  were  then  on  duty  in  the 
colony,  and  this  considerable  force,  with  a  large  commissariat 
establishment,  imparted  quite  a  military  appearance  to  the 
place.  The  houses  were  for  the  most  part  built  in  the 
English  style,  the  shops  well  stocked,  and  the  people  one 
met  with  In  the  streets  presented  the  comfortable  appear- 
ance of  a  prosperous  community.  The  cages  with  parrots 
and  cockatoos  that  hung  from  every  shop-door  formed  the 
first  feature  that  reminded  me  that  I  was  no  longer  in 
England.  George  Street,  the  principal  street  in  the  town, 
was  brilliant  with  jewellers'  shops  ;  and  I  soon  ascertained 
that  Sydney  had  been  remarkable,  even  at  an  earlier  period, 
for  the  same  phenomenon,  the  receivers  of  stolen  plate  and 
articles  of  bijouterie  in  England  having  chosen  Sydney  as  a 
safe  depot  for  the  disposal  of  such  articles.  Ground  was 
not  so  valuable  as  it  soon  afterwards  became,  and  com- 
modious verandaed  cottages,  around  which  English  roses 
clustered,  with  large  gardens,  were  scattered  through  the 
town.  Nothing  met  the  stranger's  eye  to  convey  the  notion 
that  he  was  in  the  capital  of  a  penal  colony.  The  first  im- 
pression of  Sydney,  on  a  summer  evening's  visit,was  pleasant, 
and  full  of  agreeable  promise.  When,  however,  day  dawned, 
the  delusion  of  the  evening  was  dispelled.  Early  in  the 
morning  the  gates  of  the  convict  prison  were  thrown  open, 
and  several  hundred  convicts  were  marched  out  in  regi* 


■.fWPtfUWT'^rt'WI'^ff^T^ff' 


[lere  ^vas 
consider- 
he  neigh- 
•e  chiefly 
id  at  this 
he  entire 

in  1829, 

ro  a  vivid 

val,'  says 

le  streets 

nts,  their 

ity  in  the 

missariat 

ice  to  the 

It  in  the 

3ople  one 

B  appear- 

h  parrots 

rmed  the 

longer  in 

he  town, 

certained 

3r  period, 

late  and 

ney  as  a 

und  was 

nd  com- 

sh  roses 

ugh  the 

e  notion 

first  im- 

leasant, 

dawned, 

in  the 

n  open, 

in  regi- 


SYDNEY  IN  1829. 


225 


mental  file,  and  distributed  amongst  the  several  public 
works  in  and  about  the  town.     As  they  passed  along,  the 
chains  clanking  at  their  heels,  the  patchwork  dress  of  coarso 
gray  and  yellow  cloth,  marked  with  the  Government  brand, 
in  which  they  were  paraded,  the  downcast  countenances 
and  the  whole  appearance  of  the  men  exhibited  a  truly 
painful  picture.     Nor  was  it  much  improved  throughout  the 
day,  as  one  met  bands  of  them,  in  detachments  of  twenty, 
yoked  to  waggons  laden  with  gravel  and  stone,  which  they 
wheeled  through  the  streets.     In  this  and  in  other  respects 
they  performed  all  the  functions  of  labour  usually  discharged 
by  beasts  of  burden  at  home.   These  were  painful  spectacles, 
but  to  the  pain  was  soon  added  a  thrill  of  horror  by  a  scene 
I  witnessed  a  day  or  two  subsequently.  The  Sydney  hospital, 
well  situated,  was  in  a  line  with  the  prisoners'  barracks,  and 
at  a  short  distance  from  them.   In  an  enclosed  yard  of  these 
barracks,  shut  out  from  the  public  road,  flogging  was  ad- 
ministered.    A  band  of  from  ten  to  twenty  were  daily  at 
one  period  marched  into  this  yard  to  be  flogged.     As  I 
passed  along  the  road,  about  eleven  o'clock  in  the  morning, 
there  issued  out  of  the  prisoners'  barracks  a  party  consisting 
of  four  men,  who  bore  on  their  shoulders  (two  supporting 
the  head  and  two  at  the  feet)  a  miserable  convict,  writhing 
in  an  agony  of  pain,  his  voice  piercing  the  air  with  terrific 
screams.     Astonished  at  the  sight,  I  inquired  what  this 
meant,  and  was  told  '  it  was  only  a  prisoner  who  had  been 
flogged,   and  who  was  on  his  way  to  the  hospital !'      It 
often  took  a  sufferer  a  week  or  ten  days,  after  one  of  these 
lacerations,  before  he  was  sufficiently  recovered  to  resume 
his  labour  ;  and  I  soon  learned  that  what  I  had  seen  was  at 
that  period  an  ordinary  occurrence.'* 

That  excessive  severity,  by  which  the  worst  convicts  were 
made  far  worse — *  When  I  landed  here,'  said  one  of  them, 
*  I  had  the  heart  of  a  man  in  me,  but  you  have  plucked  it 
out  and  planted  the  heart  of  a  brute  instead ' — was  often 
reflected  in  the  treatment  adopted  by  the  early  governors 

*  Therry,  pp.  39-43. 

15 


\\ 


226 


OLD  NEW  SOUTH  WALES. 


\  w 


■'  •  r  ■ 


f; 


I  ■ 


^1    1- 


\  bl: 


:i  \ 


1-  .1 


towards  the  free  settlers  in  the  colony.  General  Macquarie 
had  sought  to  make  the  whole  district  a  home  for  convicts. 
The  two  governors  who  succeeded  him,  Sir  Thomas  Brisbane, 
from  1822  to  1825,  and  Sir  Kalph  Darling,  from  1826  to 
1831,  introducing  many  beneficial  measures,  and  desiring  to 
increase  the  number  of  colonists,  could  not  abstain  from 
practising  upon  them  some  of  the  tyranny  which  they  learnt 
as  prison-overseers.  The  colonists,  however,  growing  more 
influential  every  year,  were  strong  enough  to  resist  such 
conduct ;  and,  if  unfortunate  party-feeling  sprang  therefrom, 
it  also  issued  in  much  good  to  New  South  Wales.  In  1823 
the  functions  of  the  governor,  who  had  hitherto  ruled  the 
colony  by  a  sort  of  martial  law,  were  curtailed  by  the  insti- 
tution of  a  supreme  court  of  justice  for  hearing  all  civil, 
criminal,  and  other  pleas.  In  the  same  year  a  Legislative 
Council  of  seven  members  was  appointed  to  aid  the  governor 
in  making  laws  for  the  colony ;  and  this  Council  was  re- 
organized on  an  improved  basis  in  1829.  Before  that,  the 
inhabitants  had  claimed  a  more  independent  power,  both  in 
legislation  and  in  oversight  of  administrative  arrangements, 
but  representative  privileges  were  not  accorded  to  them  till 
1841.  The  chief  cause  of  the  delay  was  the  wise  use  made 
of  his  powers  by  a  new  governor,  who  was  sent  to  New 
South  Wales  in  1831,  and  remained  in  office  until  1838. 

The  new  governor,  the  most  statesman-like  and  liberal- 
minded  ever  sent  to  the  colony,  was  Sir  Eichard  Bourke. 
Eeadily  discerning  the  great  resources  of  the  vast  district 
assigned  to  him,  he  promptly  set  himself  to  aid  their  de- 
velopment, so  as  to  benefit  both  the  colonists  and  the 
mother  country.  Previous  governors  had  striven  to  keep 
the  settlers  as  much  as  possible  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Sydney.  Bourke  had  not  been  many  months  in  New  South 
Wales  before  he  inaugurated  a  directly  opposite  policy. 
*  The  proprietors  soon  find,'  he  wrote  in  a  despatch  to 
England,  *  from  the  increase  of  their  flocks  and  herds,  that 
it  becomes  necessary  to  send  their  stock  beyond  the  boundary 
of  location,  and  to  form  what  are  termed  "new  stations;" 


j^im. 


icquarie 
onvicts. 
risbane, 
1826  to 
siring  to 
lin  from 
sy  learnt 
Lig  more 
ist  such 
erefrom, 
In  1823 
uled  the 
he  insti- 
all  civil, 
igislative 
governor 
was  re- 
bhat,  the 
,  both  in 
^ements, 
ihem  till 
.se  made 
to  New 
1838. 
liberal- 
Bourke. 
district 
Iheir  de- 
,nd  the 
to  keep 
•hood  of 
iw  South 
policy, 
atch  to 
■ds,  that 
[oundary 
»,tions;" 


ITS  GOVERNORS:  SIR  RICHARD  BOURKE.     227 

otherwise  the  only  alternative  left  to  them  would  be  either 
to  restrain  the  increase  of  their  stock,  or  to  find  artificial 
food  for  it.  The  first  of  these  courses  would  lead  to  a  severe 
falling  off  in  the  supply  of  wool ;  and  as  to  artificial  food, 
from  the  uncertainty  of  the  seasons,  and  the  light  character 
of  the  soil,  it  would  be  quite  impracticable.  Besides,  either 
course  would  seem  to  be  a  rejection  of  the  bounties  of  Provi- 
dence that  spreads,  with  a  prodigal  hand,  its  magnificent 
carpet  of  bright  green  sward  over  boundless  plains,  and 
clothes  the  depths  of  the  valleys  with  abundant  grass. 
Moreover,  the  restraint  on  dispersion  would  entail  an  ex- 
pense in  the  management  which  could  not  profitably  repay 
the  Government.'  Therefore,  he  resolved,  instead  of  hinder- 
ing them,  to  give  free  encouragement  to  *  squatters,'  as  they 
now  began  to  be  called.  He  had  the  country,  far  and  wide, 
surveyed  and  parcelled  into  lots ;  and  these  lots  he  sold  as 
often  as  there  was  demand  for  them,  at  whatever  prices  they 
could  command  at  public  auction.  Instead  of  keeping  the 
convicts  at  useless  drudgery,  he  facilitated  their  employment 
in  all  sorts  of  ways  beneficial  to  the  colonists,  and  made 
them  better  workmen  by  treating  them  less  cruelly.  Thus 
he  had  fewer  runaways  to  become  bushrangers ;  and  the 
bushrangers  already  prowling  about  the  country  he  zealously, 
though  with  no  undue  severity,  hunted  down  and  punished. 
He  reformed  the  magistracy,  and  improved  the  machinery  of 
justice.  He  gave  freedom  to  the  press.  He  established 
religious  equality,  and  "ncouraged  unsectarian  education. 
No  wise  project  for  the  advancement  of  the  colony  was 
offered  to  him  in  vain  ;  and  his  own  wise  projects,  admirably 
conceived,  were  no  less  admirably  worked  out.  During  his 
eight  years  of  ofiQce,  Australia  advanced  greatly  in  material 
ways,  and  its  moral  advancement  was  yet  greater. 

The  material  progress,  however,  can  alone  be  told  in 
figures.  The  revenue  of  New  South  Wales,  which  in  1824 
had  been  £49,471,  and  was  £121,065  in  1831,  had  risen  in 
1839  to  £425,269 ;  the  public  income  from  land  having  in- 
creased in  the  eight  years  from  £3,617  to  £172,273.    The 

15—2 


t; 


m  I 

a 


^ 


J    i  I 

^  ■       I 


t 


;  ;i: 


0 

:l 

'  i 

"  • 

!', 

:!i^ 

5 

■      *'.''■ 

as 

■    |\ 

m  m 

ill' 

«t  « 

1;    ■ 
i. 

ifll 

r 


81 


228 


OLD  NEW  SOUTH  WALES. 


u  I 


111 

m 


fill' 


l\ 


\  i 


1, 


II         r-'  i 


exj'orts  in  1831  wore  valued  at  £324,108,  and  the  imports  at 
£490,152  ;  in  1839  the  former  were  wortli  £948,776,  the 
latter  £2,230,371.  The  shipping  which  in  1831  entered  the 
ports  of  the  colony — Sydney  being  almost  the  only  port — 
had  an  aggregate  tonnage  of  about  34,000 ;  in  1839  it  had 
reached  135,474  tons.  The  population  had  nearly  doubled 
in  the  eight  years  ;  and  this  population,  instead  of  being  kept 
almost  exclusively  within  a  few  days'  reach  of  Sydney,  had 
spread  over  a  large  extent  of  the  immense  colony.  In  1839 
the  new  race  of  squatters  had  attained  the  number  of  77,287, 
having  among  them  7,088  horses,  371,699  horned  cattle,  and 
1,334,593  sheep ;  and  these  squatters  and  their  herds  were 
in  occupation  of  17,730  square  miles  of  picked  land,  lying 
along  the  coast,  at  intervals,  from  Port  Macquarie  to  Port 
Phillip,  and  far  inland. 

Farther  inland,  as  well  as  to  many  parts  of  the  coast  yet 
ill-defined,   some   memorable   exploring  visits  were  made 
during  these  years.     The  greatest  of  the  early  land  adven- 
turers, the  rival  of  Flinders  on  the  sea,  was  Captain  Sturt. 
The  Blue  Mountains   having  been   crossed  in   1813,  and 
Oxley  having  gone  thence  into  the  neighbouring  districts  of 
the  interior  in  1817  and  1818,  Sturt  was  sent  in  1827  to  see 
v/hether  there  was  in  the  remote  interior,  as  was  currently 
believed,  a  great  inland  sea,  which  could  be  favourable  to 
further  colonization.     He  found  no   sea,  and  gave  good 
reasons  against  the  existence  of  any  large  extent  of  water 
beyond  the  point  which  he  reached  ;  but  during  successive 
expeditions,  lasting  to  1831,  he  discovered  the  Darling,  and 
tracked   its   course  into  the   Murray,  the  greatest  of  the 
Australian  rivers,  about  which  very  little  had  hitherto  been 
known.     Major,  afterwards  Sir  Thomas,  Mitchell  followed 
in  his  track,  and  explored  new  districts  in  1832,  1835,  and 
1838  ;  his  most  memorable  discoveries  being  in  the  district 
called  by  him,  for  its  beauty  and  fertility,  Australia  FeUx, 
now  part  of  Victoria. 

These  expeditions  of  Sturt,  Mitchell,  and  others,  marked 
by  patient  endurance  rarely  equalled,  but  not  attended  by 


■"^"•^**" 


I 

li 


ports  at 
76,  tho 
red  tho 
/•  port — 
)  it  had 
doubled 
ing  kept 
ley,  had 
In  1830 
:  77,287. 
ttle,  and 
fds  were 
id,  lying 
to  Port 

joast  yet 
ce  made 
i  adven- 
n  Sturt. 
il3,  and 
tricts  of 
27  to  see 
urrently 
irable  to 
ve  good 
Df  water 
Lceessive 
ing,  and 
of  the 
rto  been 
bllowed 
J35,  and 
district 
ia  Felix, 

marked 
nded  by 


EXPLORERS  AND  ARORIG/XES. 


229 


many  very  striking  episodes,  were  chiefly  memorable  as 
opening  up  new  fields  of  enterprise  to  planters  and  squatters. 
They  also  helped  to  make  clear  the  character  of  the  abori- 
gines, and  to  prove  that  all  the  natives  of  Australia,  differing 
considerably  amongst  themselves,  were  alike  in  their  physical 
and  mental  degradation.  *  On  the  sea  coast,'  we  are  told, 
in  an  epitome  of  the  researches  of  residents  and  travellers, 
'  they  live  principally  upon  fish,  turtle,  and  shell-fish.  In 
the  interior,  they  hunt  the  kangaroo,  wallaby,  and  emu, 
with  their  boomerangs,  spears,  and  waddies,  besides  which 
they  procure  an  uncertain  supply  of  opossums,  flying 
squirrels,  sloths,  storks,  cranes,  ducks,  parrots,  cockatoos, 
eels,  lizards,  snakes,  grubs,  and  ants.  They  have  no  fixed 
habitations,  the  climate  generally  allowing  of  their  sleeping 
in  the  open  air,  in  the  crevices  of  rocks,  or  under  the  shelter 
of  the  bushes.  Their  temporary  hovels  consist  of  the  bark 
of  a  tree,  or  a  few  bushes  interwoven  in  a  semicircular  form. 
They  seem  to  have  no  idea  of  the  benefits  arising  from  social 
life.  Their  largest  clans  extend  not  beyond  the  family 
circle.  They  are  totally  without  rehgion,  paying  neither 
respect  nor  adoration  to  any  object,  real  or  imaginary. 
They  have  nothing  to  prompt  them  to  a  good  action,  nothing 
to  deter  them  from  a  bad  one.  They  are  savage  even  in 
love ;  the  very  first  "^ct  of  courtship,  on  tho  part  of  the 
husband,  being  that  of  knocking  down  his  intended  bride 
with  a  club,  and  dragging  her  away  from  her  friends,  bleed- 
ing and  senseless,  to  the  woods.  No  evidences  of  tilling  the 
ground,  planting,  sowing  seed,  and  reaping  the  harvest 
have  been  seen  by  travellers  amongst  them,  which  dis- 
tinguishes them  essentially  from  the  Maori  race  in  New 
Zealand,  the  races  inhabiting  the  Polynesian  Islands,  and 
the  Malays.  They  do  not  trade  or  barter  with  each  other 
or  with  strangers.  Though  each  family  or  tribe  has  a 
generally  recognised  boundary  within  which  they  hunt,  and 
beyond  which  they  seldom  stray,  they  neither  exchange, 
buy,  nor  sell  land  among  each  other.  Slavery,  as  understood 
in  the  negro  sense  of  the  term,  does  not  exist.    The  married 


J 
9  ■ 

' » 

'A 

•■3 


= 

: 


i  m 


v^ 


I    I     li  , 


230 


OLD  NEW  SOUTH  WALES. 


u 


'  I 
I 

I 
i 


'  ] 


fomalcs,  however,  are,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  the  slaves 

of  their  husbands.     Polygamy  is  recognised  and  adopted. 

Cannibalism   exists  among  them.     They  shovsr  very  little 

affection  for  tlieir  offspring ;  and  their  treatment  of  the  aged 

is  even  worse  than  their  neglect  of  the  young.     That  they 

are  capable  of  being  civilized  in  a  measure  is  shown  by  the 

organized  troops  of  black  mounted  police  throughout  the 

south-eastern  colonies,  and  the  general  employment  of  them 

by  the  colonists  as  shepherds  and  mountain  herdsmen.     In 

a  few  instances  they  have  been  taught  to  read  and  write. 

But  at  best  they  are  uncertain  retainers,  and  cannot  be  kept 

to  constant  labour,  while  they  have  a  very  faint  conception 

of  the  relations  between  master  and  servant.     Like  most 

other  savages,  they  exhibit  the  extremes  of  indolence  when 

their  appetite  is   satiated,  and  of  activity  when  hunger 

prompts  them  to  hunt  for  food.     Treachery  and  cunning 

among  them   are   considered  virtues.     In  their  relations 

with  the  Europeans  no  faith  can  be  placer*     i  what  they 

say.      They   have,   on   the    other    hand,   1  redeeming 

qualities.     They  will  cheerfully  share  their  meals  with  an 

unsuccessful  neighbour,  and  will  seldom  refuse  the  white 

man    a    portion,   from  whom,  however,  they   expect    an 

equivalent.     Like  children,  they  are  easily  pleased ;   and, 

when  their  appetites  are  satisfied,  they  become  a  jocular 

and  merry  race,  full  of  mimicry  and  laughter.'* 

*  Westgarth,  '  Australia :  its  Rise,  Progress,  and  Present  Condition,' 
pp.  113-116. 


ihe  slaves 
adopted, 
ery  littlo 
:  the  aged 
rbat  they 
vn  by  the 
;hout  the 
t  of  thein 
men.  In 
,nd  write. 
Dt  be  kept 
onception 
jike  most 
nee  when 
n  hunger 
I  cunning 
relations 
vhat  they 
redeeming 
J  with  an 
ihe  white 
xpect  an 
ed ;  and, 
a  jocular 


Condition,' 


CHAPTEE  XXI. 

TASMANIA. 

THE  OFFSHOOTS  OF  NEW  SOUTH  WALES— THE  EARLY  HISTORY  OP  TASMANIA, 
OR  VAN  DIEMEN's  LAND— ITS  EHTABLI.SHMENT  AS  AN  INDEPENDENT 
COLONY — ITS  CONVICTS  AND  HUSH-RANGERS  —  EXTERMINATION  OP  THE 
ARORKSINKS — ITS  BEST  GOVERNORS  :  SIR  OEORCJR  ARTHUR  AND  SIR  JOHN 
FRANKLIN— ITS  GREATEST  PROSPERITY — ITS  DETERIORATION  AND  PRESENT 
STATE.      [1803-1888.] 

HEN,  in  1786,  it  was  resolved  to  establish  an 
English  colony  in  Australia,  the  limits  of  the  new 
settlement  were  declared  to  extend  '  from  the 
northern  cape  or  extremity  of  the  coast  called  Cape 
York,  in  tlie  latitude  of  10"  37'  S.,  to  the  South 
Cape,  the  southern  extremity  of  the  coast,  in  the  latitude  of 
43°  39'  S. ;  and  inland  to  the  westward,  as  far  as  135°  E. 
longitude,  including  all  the  islands  in  the  Pacific  Ocean 
within  the  latitudes  aforesaid.'  By  that  arrangement  New 
South  Wales  was  made  to  include  about  two-thirds  of  Aus- 
tralia, with  Norfolk  Island  and  other  tributaries,  and  Van 
Diemen's  Land,  not  then  known  to  be  a  separate  island. 
As  the  vast  dimensions  and  capabilities  of  the  territory 
came  to  be  better  understood,  and  as  the  settlers  in  its 
various  parts  became  more  numerous,  this  huge  colony,  half 
as  large  as  Europe,  was  broken  up  into  sections,  each  under 
separate  governors,  and  with  independent  centres  of  juris- 
diction. Van  Diemen's  La'-l  was  so  parted  off  in  1824, 
South  Australia  in  1834,  Victoria  in  1851,  and  Queensland 


I    ; 


':   ii 


I: 


I    i 


\W 


I 


}■  > 


t  1 


132 


TASMANIA. 


in  1859.  New  South  Wales  is  thus  the  mother  of  four 
youuger  colonies,  which  now  vie  with  her  in  wealth  and  im- 
portance, and  we  must  make  several  digressions  from  our 
history  of  the  parent  settlement  in  order  to  sketch  the 
progress  of  its  offshoots. 

Van  Diemen's  Land,  now  generally  called  Tasmania,  in 
honour  of  its  discoverer,  the  oldest  rival  of  the   mother 
colony,  is  the  least  successful.     More  favoured  by  nature 
than  any  other  of  the  Australasian  group  of  settlements,  un- 
less we  except  New  Zealand,  it  has  had  a  less  profitable 
career  than  any  of  them.     Soon  after  Bass  and  Flinders 
showed,  in  1797  and  1798,;that  it  was  a  separate  island,  and 
one  excellently  adapted  by  its  genial  climate,  its  splendid 
harbours,  and  its  well-watered  coasts,  for  a  residence  of 
white  men,  it  began  to  be  used  both  by  the  Government  of 
New  South  Wales  and  by  the  home  authorities  as  a  re- 
ceptacle for  convicts.     It  was  taken  formal  possession  of  in 
1803,  and  both  Hobart  Town,  on  the  Derwent,  in  the  south- 
west, and  George  Town,  on  the  Tamar,  in  the  north,  were 
founded  in  1F04  ;  but  in  both  the  convicts  and  the  soldiers 
in  charge  of  them  came  almost  immediately  into  collision 
with  the  aborigines,  and  a  fierce  war  of  extermination  was 
started,  to  be  carried  on  at  intervals  during  the  sixty  years 
required  for  killing  out  all  the  barbarous  but  comparatively 
harmless  natives.    Much  suffering,  also,  was  endured  by  the 
early  settlers,  ill-fitted  for  cultivation  of  the  soil  and  for 
making  good  use  of  the  resources  of  the  island.     Better 
times  began  about  the  year  1810.     In  1813  merchant  ships 
were  allowed  to  visit  the  ports,  and  to  trade  with  their  in- 
habitants.    In  1816  the  first  export  of  grain  was  made ;  and 
in  1819  free  immigrants,  who  had  already  come  in  small 
numbers,  notwithstanding  the  obstacles  thrown  in  their  way, 
and  who  had  done  nearly  all  the  good  that  had  been  effected, 
were  openly  allowed  to  settle  in  the  island.     In  1824  its 
Enghsh  population  comprised  5,938  convicts,  266  soldiers, 
and  6,029  free  residents. 
In  that  year  "Van  Diemen's  Land  was  made  an  independent 


of  four 
and  im- 
'om  our 
itch  the 

:a.nia,  in 
mother 
J  nature 
snts,  un- 
rofitable 
Flinders 
md,  and 
splendid 
lencc  of 
iment  of 
as  a  re- 
ion  of  in 
.8  south- 
th,  were 
soldiers 
collision 
]ion  was 
by  years 
-ratively 
by  the 
and  for 
Better 
it  ships 
leir  in- 
de;  and 
small 
iir  way, 
jffected, 
.824  its 
oldiers, 

)endent 


ITS  PLANTA  TION  WITH  CONVICTS. 


233 


colony,  with  a  Legislative  Council  of  its  own,  and  a  Supreme 
Court  of  Judicature.  Sir  George  Arthur,  the  first  governor, 
who  held  his  ofRce  till  1836,  wisely  used  the  powers  entrusted 
to  him.  He  reformed  the  magistiacy  of  the  island,  divided 
it  into  well-ordered  police  districts,  and,  in  various  important 
ways,  sought,  to  a  great  extent  effectually,  tg  bring  about 
the  well-being  of  its  inhabitants. 

The  reforms  were  sorely  needed.  The  troubles  that  pre- 
vailed in  the  chief  settlements  were  surpassed  by  those 
caused  in  the  less  frequented  districts,  where  a  few  enter- 
prising farmers  tried  to  make  profit  out  of  the  fertile  soil, 
and  which  they,  and  the  traders  connected  with  them, 
occasionally  traversed  in  pursuit  of  their  callings.  These 
districts  were  infested  by  bush-rangers,  who,  as  in  New 
South  Wales,  were  generally  runaway  convicts  of  the  worst 
sort.  Of  their  lawless  conduct  one  illustration  may  be 
given.  '  In  1824,'  says  the  historian,  '  fourteen  desperate 
convicts,  of  whom  the  leaders  were  Crawford,  Brady,  Dunne, 
and  Cody,  made  their  escape  from  the  penal  settlement  at 
Port  Macquarie  in  a  whale-boat.  They  coasted  the  south- 
west shores  of  the  island,  and  ultimately  reached  the  shores 
of  the  Derwent  River,  where  they  landed,  and  were  soon 
joined  by  numerous  associates,  provided  with  arms  and  other 
necessaries.  Crawford,  a  clever  Scotchman,  said  to  have 
been  formerly  a  lieutenant  or  mate  in  the  Boyal  Navy, 
organized  and  disciplined  this  gang  of  freebooters,  who 
soon  filled  the  respectab^"-  colonists  with  alarm.  One  of 
their  earliest  attacks  was  directed  against  the  mansion  of 
Mr.  Taylor,  of  Valley-field,  on  the  Macquarie  River.  The 
banditti  mustered  thirteen :  the  family  consisted  of  the 
venerable  old  gentleman,  in  his  seventy-fourth  year,  three 
sons,  two  daughters,  a  carpenter,  and  another  free  servant. 
While  the  robbers  were  advancing  they  made  prisoner 
Mr.  Taylor's  youngest  son,  whom  they  placed  in  front, 
threatening  his  immediate  destruction  if  they  were  opposed. 
The  gallant  veteran,  despite  the  disparity  of  numbers  and 
the  fearful  position  of  his  son,  sallied  forth,  accompanied  by 


.  '\ 


•:'■!' 


W  if  \l\ 


234 


TASMANIA. 


1  I, 
i 


I      I 


; 
i 

i 


■IJI" 


two  other  sons  and  a  servant,  to  give  battle.  The  fearful 
contest  was  kept  up  for  a  considerable  period,  the  ladies 
charging  the  fire-arms  of  their  father  and  brothers,  and  the 
whole  party  fighting  for  life,  and  more  than  life,  since  the 
treatment  these  defenceless  females  were  likely  to  receive  at 
the  hands  of  these  wretches  was  more  to  be  dreaded  than 
death  itself.  At  length  the  bush-rangers  were  compelled  to 
retreat,  leaving  Crawford  and  two  of  his  gang  on  the  field 
dangerously  wounded.  They  were  handed  over  to  justice, 
and  perished  on  the  scaffold.  The  command  of  the  gang 
then  devolved  on  Brady,  whose  name  operated  hke  a  spell 
in  giving  confidence  to  the  bush-rangers,  and  whose  rapid 
and  daring  movements  struck  terror  into  every  part  of  the 
island.  For  nearly  two  years  this  Tasmanian  brigand,  who 
made  it  his  boast  that  he  "  never  wantonly  sacrificed  human 
life,  and  never  outraged  female  delicacy,"  set  every  effort  for 
his  capture  at  defiance ;  and  his  traits  of  generosity  and 
reckless  daring  threw  a  prestige  around  even  his  worst 
actions,  which,  among  the  less  depraved  convicts,  rendered 
his  example  more  injurious  because  more  alluring.  The 
superior  knowledge  of  the  bush  possessed  by  the  brigands, 
together  with  the  information  acquired  by  their  scouts 
scattered  all  over  the  country,  and  obtained  from  among  the 
convict  servants  assigned  in  private  houses,  enabled  them  to 
out-general  every  military  or  police  movement.  The  military 
at  this  period  consisted  of  only  two  or  three  small  detach- 
ments, and  there  was  then  no  effective  police.  Large 
rewards  were  in  vain  offered  for  the  capture,  or  for  the  heads, 
of  the  robbers.  The  contributions  levied  upon  the  settlers 
enabled  the  leaders  to  purchase  connivance ;  and  the  resi- 
dents at  out-stations  feared  to  become  marked  men  by  aiding 
in  the  attempts  at  capturing  the  ringleaders.  Some  of  the 
small  settlers  not  only  supplied  the  gangs  with  provisions 
and  ammunition,  but  kept  them  acquainted  with  every  plan 
projected  for  their  apprehension. '"**■ 

Brady's  gang  was  only  one,  and  one  of  the  most  gentle- 
*  Martin,  vol,  iii.,  pp.  7,  8. 


5  fearful 
e  ladies 
and  the 
ince  the 
3ceive  at 
.ed  than 
pelled  to 
bhe  field 
justice, 
ihe  gang 
e  a  spell 
ise  rapid 
rt  of  the 
md,  who 
i  human 
effort  for 
)sity  and 
is  worst 
rendered 
ig.     The 
brigands, 
t:  scouts 
(long  the 
hem  to 
militarv 
detach- 
Large 
le  heads, 
settlers 
the  resi- 
)y  aiding 
e  of  the 
©visions 
ery  plan 

;  gentle - 


THE  BUSH-RANGERS  AND  THEIR  WORK.      235 

manly,  of  the  robber  hordes  that  infested  Van  Diemen's 
Land,  some  of  the  most  degraded  being  even  suspected  of 
adding  cannibalism  to  their  other  crimes.  For  their  sup- 
pression all  the  energies  of  Governor  Arthur  were  taxed,  and 
often  with  only  a  slight  result.  He  had  difficulties  almost 
as  great  also  in  overcoming  another  class  of  enemies  raised 
up  by  the  misconduct  of  the  early  rulers  of  the 'island.  The 
aborigines,  akin  to  the  natives  of  Australia,  but  more  bar- 
barous and  vindictive,  were  turned  into  deadly  foes  ;  and 
during  his  term  of  government,  as  well  as  before  and  after, 
an  ugly  and  unequal  war  was  waged  between  them  and  the 
colonists,  quite  as  painful  and  disastrous  as  that  which  has 
characterized  the  dealings  of  Europeans  with  the  Kaffirs  of 
the  Cape,  and  with  the  Maoris  of  New  Zealand.  Hideous 
tales  are  told  of  the  atrocities  of  the  blacks,  and  the  less 
excusable  ferocities  of  the  whites,  who  saw  no  way  of  ridding 
themselves  of  their  foes  than  by  gradually  exterminating 
them. 

The  effect  upon  the  colonists  was  not  good.  Yet  Sir 
George  Arthur's  care,  and  the  zeal  of  his  suboruinates, 
enabled  the  settlement  to  make  rapid  progress  both  in  agri- 
culture and  in  commerce.  Hobart  Town,  in  the  south-east, 
became  a  flourishing  capital ;  and  Launcestou,  in  the  north, 
which  soon  acquired  more  importance  than  the  neighbouring 
George  Town,  was  a  hardly  less  influential  centre  of  enter- 
prise. Open  enemies,  whether  bush-rangers  or  aborigines, 
were  by  degrees  suppressed ;  the  bad  passions  of  many  of 
the  settlers  were  kept  under ;  better  or  more  prudent  men 
found  easy  ways  of  money-making.  In  1836,  when  Gover- 
nor Arthur  resigned  his  office,  the  island  had  a  convict 
population  of  17,611,  and  its  free  residents  numbered  25,914, 
four  times  as  many  as  in  1824  ;  and  in  1840,  the  convicts 
being  about  as  numerous,  there  were  28,294  free  inhabitants. 
The  revenue  of  the  colony,  which  was  £32,126  in  1824,  rose 
to  £101,016  in  1834,  and  to  £183,171  in  1840.  The  imports 
of  those  three  years  were  valued  respectively  at  £62,000, 
£476,617,  and  £988,357  ;  the  exports  at  £14,500,  £203,522, 


!i! 


[^}W!rp}/  fi 


V 


M!|Hi 


■  1 1 


v,\n' 


■M  V 


236 


TASMANIA. 


and  £867,007 — the  former  having  increased  more  than  fifteen 
times,  the  latter  nearly  sixty  times,  in  sixteen  years.  The 
year  1840  was  the  most  prosperous  in  the  whole  history  of 
Van  Diemen's  Land. 

That  prosperity  was  partly  due  to  the  wise  conduct  of  the 
next  governor.  Sir  John  Franklin,  most  famous  by  reason  of 
his  subsequent  ill-fated  expedition  in  search  of  a  north-west 
passage  to  India.  His  greatest  service  in  Van  Diemen's 
Land  was  in  ameliorating  the  condition  of  the  convicts, 
whereby  a  good  influence  was  exerted  upon  the  whole  cori- 
munity.  Bad  influences,  however,  came  from  the  excessive 
tide  of  convict  emigration  which  set  in  in  1840,  when, 
transportation  to  New  South  Wales  being  abolished,  the 
other  penal  settlements  in  Australasia  were  over- weighted 
with  criminals.  *  The  w)  ole  colony,'  said  Earl  Grey,  when 
Colonial  Secretary,  *  was  thrown  into  confusion  and  dis- 
order, owing  to  the  large  number  of  convicts  who  had  no 
employment.  This  led  to  a  state  of  things  which  was  abso- 
lutely frightful.  The  demoralization  which  took  place 
among  the  probation  gangs  was  shocking  to  contemplate.' 
In  the  five  years  subsequent  to  1840  there  were  19,878  con- 
victs transported  to  Van  Diemen's  Land.  *  In  1840,'  said 
Captain  Stokes,  sent  specially  to  inquire  into  and  report 
upon  the  condition  of  this  and  other  penal  colonies,  *  every- 
thing wore  a  smiling  prospect.  The  fields  were  heavy  with 
harvests,  the  roads  crowded  with  traffic  ;  gay  equipages 
filled  the  streets.  The  settler's  cottage  or  villa  was  well 
supplied  with  comforts,  and  even  with  luxuries.  Crime,  in 
a  population  of  which  the  majority  were  convicts,  or  their 
descendants,  was  less  in  proportion  than  in  England.  Trade 
was  brisk,  agriculture  increasing.  New  settlers  were  arriving. 
Everything  betokened  progress.  No  one  dreamt  of  retro- 
gression or  decay.  In  four  years  all  this  was  reversed,  and, 
though  many  other  causes  may  have  co-operated  in  pro- 
ducing this  change,  it  seems  acknowledged  by  most  persons 
that  the  result  is  chiefly  traceable  to  the  disproportionate 
increase  in  the    amount    of    transportation,   which    first 


m  fifteen 
,rs.  The 
listory  of 

act  of  the 
reason  of 
3rth-west 
Diemen's 
convicts, 
lole  cor*i- 
excessive 
0,  when, 
shed,  the 
weighted 
•ey,  when 
and  dis- 
o  had  no 
was  abso- 
ok   place 
emplate.' 
1,878  con- 
MO,'  said 
id  report 
!,  '  every- 
;avy  with 
squipages 
was  well 
Crime,  in 
or  their 
,    Trade 
arriving, 
of  retro- 
sed,  and, 
in  pro- 
persons 
ortionate 
ich    first 


ITS  PROGRESS  AS  A  FREE  COLONY. 


237 


checked  free  immigration  ;  and,  secondly,  by  glutting  the 
labour-market,  the  free  population  was  necessarily  dis- 
placed, and  those  who  had  actually  established  themselves 
on  the  island  as  their  second  home  were  driven  away 
from  it.' 

Sir  John  Franklin  was  succeeded  ^in  1843  by  Sir  Eardly 
Wilmot,  who  was  followed  after  an  interval  by  Sir  William 
Thomas  Denison  in  1847.     In   1850  Van  Diemen's  Land 
received  a  new  constitution.     The  frequent  petitions  of  its 
inhabitants  for  full  representative  privileges  were  not  at 
once  granted  ;  but,  in  lieu  of  the  old  machinery  of  govern- 
ment, a  new  Legislative  Council  was  appointed,  of  whose 
twenty-four  members  one-third  was  to  be  chosen  by  the 
Crown,  the  other  two-thirds  by  election  of  the  free  colonists. 
In  1855  somewhat  fuller  liberties  were  accorded.  The  Legis- 
lative Council,  nominated  by  the  Crown,  was  reduced  to 
fifteen  members ;  but  thirty  delegates  of   the  inhabitants 
were  formed  into  a  House  of  Assembly.    In  1853  the  yet 
more  frequent  and  more  urgent  petitions  of  the  people  were 
listened  to,  and  further  transportation  of  convicts  was  aban- 
doned, so  that  now  the  whole  population  is  free,,     Since 
then  the  population  has  almost  constantly,  though  not  very 
rapidly,  increased.     In  1848  it  numbered  74,741,  two-thirds 
free  and  one-third  bond.     In  1867  it  amounted  to  98,455, 
and  in  1886  to  137,211.     In  the  latter  year  the  imports 
were  valued  at  £1,756,567,  the  exports  at  £1,133,540,  each 
nearly  twice   as  much  as    in   1840.       Wool    constitutes 
about  half  of  the  exports,  much  of  the  rest  being  wheat, 
fruit,  and  other  agricultural  products  sent  to  the  neighbour- 
ing colonies.     Of  the  whole  area  of  the  island,  comprising 
26,215  square  miles,  not  much  less  than  that  of  Ireland, 
hardly  a  fortieth  part  is  under  cultivation.     About  a  fifth  is 
occupied  in  sheep-farming.     The  rest,  for  the  most  part 
fertile  and  healthy,  with  rich  stores  of  timber  on  the  surface, 
and  an  abundant  supply  of  coal,  iron,  copper,  and  other 
minerals   underground,  is    as    yet    hardly    used,   though 
some  of  its  tin  mines  are  worked,  and  some  gold  is  found. 


■! 


I     I 


I    !    ;( 


238 


TASMANIA. 


ilN 


r; 


h 


'■  \ 


■  i : 

r    *-' 
r   J 


H'l 


i  ■  'i 


1  ? 

i  J 


•r   rRi 

':  "ii 
«  itii 
:  .III 

-  a 

[  ^' 

Ml 

"■•,«!! 


!■ 


<l 


■;<!"• 


*  Nature,'  said  a  traveller  in  1866,  *  is  bountiful  enough. 
In  the  world  there  is  not  a  fairer  climate.  The  gum-trees 
grow  to  350  feet,  attesting  the  richness  of  the  soil ;  and  the 
giant  tree-ferns  are  never  injured  by  heat,  us  in  Australia,  or 
by  cold,  as  in  Nev  Zealand.  Even  more  than  Britain, 
Tasmania  may  be  said  to  present  in  a  small  area  an  epitome 
of  the  globe ;  mountain  and  plain,  forest  and  rolling  prairie- 
land,  rivers  and  grand  capes,  and  the  noblest  htirbour  in  the 
world.  It  is  disheartening,  in  an  English  colony,  to  see  half 
the  houses  shut  up  and  deserted,  and  acre  upon  acre  of  old 
wheat-lana  abandoned  to  mimosa-scrub.  Such  is  the  indo- 
lence of  the  settlers,  that  vast  tracts  of  land  in  the  central 
plain,  once  fertile  under  irrigation,  have  been  allowed  to  fall 
back  into  a  desert  state  from  sh  ^er  neglect  of  the  dams  and 
conduits.  Though  iron  .ind  coal  are  abundant,  they  are 
seldom,  if  ever,  worked ;  and  one  house  in  every  thirty-two 
in  the  whole  island  is  licensed  for  the  sale  of  spirits,  of  which 
the  annual  consumption  3xceeds  five  gallons  a-head  for  every 
man,  woman,  and  child  in  the  population.  The  curse  of  the 
country  is  the  indolence  of  its  lotus-eating  population,  who, 
like  all  dwellers  in  climates  cool  but  winterless,  are  content 
to  dream  away  their  lives  in  drowsiness,  to  which  the  habits 
of  a  hotter  but  less  equable  climate — Queensland,  for 
example — are  energy  itself.  In  addition,  however,  to  this 
natural  cause  of  decline.  Van  Diemen's  Land  is  not  yet  free 
from  all  traces  of  the  convict  blood,  nor  from  the  evil  effects 
of  reliance  on  forced  labour.  The  old  free  settlers  will  tell 
you  that  the  deadly  shade  of  slave  labour  has  not  blighted 
Jamaica  more  thoroughly  than  that  of  convict  labour  has 
Van  Diemen's  Land.'"*^ 

There  have  been  considerable  changes,  most  of  them  for 
the  better,  since  those  words  were  written.  Sir  Charles  Du 
Cane,  between  1869  and  1874,  after  him  Sir  F.  A.  Weld,  till 
1880,  and  subsequently  Sir  George  C.  Strahan,  were  able 
governors,  and  much  was  done  by  them  and  others  to  im- 
prove the  colony.  Since  the  introduction  of  railways  in 
*  Dilke,  ♦  Greater  Britain,'  pp.  354,  357,  358. 


CI  VI LIZ  A  TION  AT  PAUL  T. 


239 


enough. 

iim-trees 

and  the 

tralia,  or 

Britain, 

epitome 

\  prairie- 

ir  in  the 

'  see  half 

re  of  old 

he  indo- 

!  central 

id  to  fall 

ams  and 

bhey  are 

irty-two 

Df  which 

For  every 

30  of  the 

m,  who, 

content 

e  habits 

nd,   for 

to  this 
yet  free 

effects 

^vill  tell 

)lighted 

)ur  has 


1871,  many  parts  of  the  interior  have  been  opened  up,  and 
trade  has  been  quickened.  The  licensing  laws  have  been 
reformed,  ind  great  progress  has  been  made  in  the  spread  of 
education.  The  convict  element  has  been  absorbed  in  the 
general  population,  and  no  further  quarrelling  with  the 
aborigines  is  possible.  The  last  representative  of  the 
native  race,  an  old  woman  known  as  Truganiria,  or  Lalla 
Rookh,  died  in  1876,  at  the  age  of  seventy-three.* 

*  An  interesting  account  of  the  aborigines  of  Van  Diemen'g  Land  and 
their  gradual  decay  under  English  colonization,  full  of  painful  instruction 
as  to  general,  or  too  general,  issues  of  tl»e  struggle  between  '  civilization  ' 
and  savagery,  will  be  found  in  'The  Lost  Taamanian  llace  '  (1884),  by 
Mr.  James  Bonwick. 


3»'   ! 


'  fi 


em  for 
les  Du 
3ld,  till 
[•e  able 
to  im- 
ays  in 


(; 


:!|iQ 


il-i:'  ' 


;  .|f  ^1 


'  ;l  !:l 


:l:    I 


i    I     l- 


1  1 


«  »i 

;  SI 

ii  III 

I  J' 

i  ■*• 

»  "•■ 

Ml 

;  * 

*  Ml 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

NEW   SOUTH   WALES   AND   THE   TORT   PHILLIP   DISTRICT. 

THE  DI8C0VBBY  OP  PORT  PHILLIP — COLONEL  COLLINS's  ATTEMPTED  SETTLE- 
MENT  ON  ITS  COAST — LATER  ENTERPRISES — HKNTY,  BATMAN,  FAWKNER 
AND  MITCHELL — BUCKLEY's  ADVENTURES  AMONG  THE  ABORIGINES — ESTAB- 
LISHMENT OB'  THE  PORT  PHILLIP  SETTLEMENT — THE  PROGRESS  OP  NEW 
SOUTH   WALES — THE  SQUATTERS   AND  THEIR  WORK — MELBOURNE  BETWEEN 

1838  AND  1849— SYDNEY  IN  1849.     [1802-1851.] 

0  sooner  had  Bass's  Strait — separating  Australia 
from  Van  Diemen's  Land — been  explored  than 
projects  began  to  be  formed  for  making  use  of 
the  districts  on  either  side.  The  experiment  in 
Van  Diemen's  Land,  on  the  south,  has  been  de- 
scribed. The  experiment  in  Port  Phillip,  now  the  colony  of 
Victoria,  on  the  north,  was  more  successful,  though  tie 
success  has  only  recently  become  very  notable. 

The  bay  still  known  as  Port  Phillip  was  first  entered  by 
Lieutenant  Murray,  R.N.,  in  the  Lady  Nelson,  in  February, 
1802,  and  within  a  few  weeks  the  harbour  was  also  visited 
by  Flinders  and  by  Baudin,  the  French  explorer.  It  was  thus 
discovered  thrice  over  in  the  space  of  less  than  three  months; 
and  it  was  probably  the  fear  that  France  would  lay  claim  to 
a  district  that  all  three  voyagers  joined  in  praising,  which 
led  the  authorities  in  New  South  Wales  and  the  British 
Government  to  make  speedy  arrangements  for  its  settlement. 
The  arrangements  were  made  too  speedily  to  be  prosperous. 
Two  ship-loads  of  convicts  and  military  guards,  about  500  in 
all,  were  sent  out  from  England  under  Colonel  Collins,  with 


THE  STARTING  OF  VICTORIA. 


241 


TRICT. 

PED  SETTLE. 
,  FAWKNEB 
ES — ESTAB. 
MS  OF  NEW 
IB  BETWEEN 


Australia 
)red  than 
ig  use  of 
iment  in 
Deen  de- 
colony  of 
)Ugli  tLe 

:ered  by 
'ebruary, 
o  visited 
was  thus 
months; 
claim  to 
g,  which 

British 
tleraent. 
sperous. 

t  500  in 
ns,  with 


orders  to  form  a  penal  establishment  in  Port  Phillip  on  the 
model  of  that  already  flourishing  at  Sydney.  They  arrived 
in  October,  1803,  and  were  landed  near  Point  Nepean,  at  the 
mouth  of  the  bay,  where  there  was  no  adequate  supply  of 
fresh  water  to  be  obtained  without  sending  the  colonists  far 
inland  on  excursions  which  made  escape  easy  to  them. 
Collins,  dissatisfied  with  this  position,  did  not  dare  to  seek  a 
better  one  in  a  different  part  of  the  bay.  Early  in  the  fol- 
lowing year  he  abandoned  it,  and,  crossing  Bass's  Strait,  with 
all  the  convicts  remaining  in  his  charge,  and  passing  round 
the  west  coast  of  Van  Diemen's  Land,  there  founded  Hobart 
Town.  His  indolence  caused  the  colonization  of  Victoria  to 
be  delayed  for  a  generation,  but  saved  it  from  the  troubles 
that  might  have  befallen  it  as  a  convict  settlement. 

After  that.  Van  Diemen's  Land  being  able  to  receive  all 
the  criminals  for  whom  there  was  not  room  in  Sydney  and 
its  neighbourhood,  Port  Phillip  was  forgotten  till  1824,  when 
two  bold  colonists  of  New  South  Wales,  Hamilton  Hume 
and  W.  C.  Hovell,  crossed  overland  to  the  bay  and  visited 
the  site  of  Geelong,  on  the  western  arm  of  Port  Phillip.  They 
thought,  however,  that  they  had  reached  Western  Port,  a 
bay  on  the  east ;  and  their  favourable  account  of  what  they 
had  seen  led  to  the  sending  of  an  exploring  party  by  sea  to 
the  latter  district  in  1826,  with  the  view  01  fixing  the  locality 
for  another  convict  settlement.  But  this  project,  being  badly 
conducted,  also  failed. 

The  first  successful  colonizing  expeditions  to  this  part  of 
Australia  came  from  Van  Diemen's  Land,  now  almost  at  the 
height  of  its  prosperity.  In  1833  Thomas  Henty,  an  enter- 
prising farmer  01  Lauuceston,  visited  Portland  Bay  at  what 
is  now  nearly  the  westernmost  limit  of  Victoria,  and  in  the 
following  year  he  transferred  to  its  shores  his  family,  a 
flock  of  sheep,  and  all  the  materials  necessary  for  pastoral , 
and  agricultural  pursuits.  Much  more  was  done  in  1835, 
wL-3n  John  Batman,  another  resident  in  Launceston,  who 
had  been  planning  the  exploit  for  eight  years,  went  with 
his  family  in  a  small  vessel  to  Indented  Head,  near  Geelong. 

16 


]\  c 


I 


f 


III 


HI 

"II 


II 


i^ 


■  31 

II  - 

Ml 

■'■* 
l-h 

.  ;ll 

'  J. 
m. 

'   •». 
'  Ml 

..r" 

Ml 
IK 
I'll 


\.Al 


242     A'^jr  SOUTH  WALES  AND  PORT  PHILLIP. 

In  June  he  went  through  the  form  of  buying  about  000,000 
acres  of  land  with  £200  worth  of  merchandise,  and  with 
amusing  boldness  assumed  the  title  of  King  of  Port  Phillip. 
He  had  hardly  done  this,  however,  before  his  assumed  pre- 
rogatives were  disputed  by  another  party,  headed  by  John 
Pascoe  Fawkner,  who  entered  Port  Phillip  in  August,  and, 
passing  on  to  its  innermost  corner,  landed  on  the  bank  of 
the  Yarra  Yarra,  and  there  built  a  hut  which  was  to  become 
the  centre  of  the  great  city  of  Melbourne.  The  quarrels  of 
Batman  and  Fawkner  are  only  important  in  that  they  helped 
to  direct  attention  to  this  most  valuable  of  all  the  scenes  of 
Australian  enterprise. 

The  enterprise  was  also  encouraged  by  the  inland  dis- 
coveries of  Sir  Thomas  Mitchell  in  1834,  1835,  and  183G. 
Starting  from  Sydney,  Mitchell  wandered  through  the 
beautiful  regions  watered  by  the  Murray  and  the  Darling, 
and  then,  proccodiug  farther  south,  explored  the  yet  more 
beautiful  expanse  of  mountains,  valleys,  and  table-lands,  to 
which  he  gave  the  name  of  Australia  Felix.  He  visited 
Portland  Bay,  where,  to  his  astonishment,  he  found  Henty's 
little  settlement,  and,  thence  journeying  eastward,  he  had 
a  distant  view  of  the  Yarra  Yarra  and  other  districts  of 
Port  Phillip,  in  which  Batman  and  Fawkner  were  roughly 
laying  the  foundations  of  a  prosperous  settlement  that  seems 
still  to  be  only  in  an  early  stage  of  its  career  of  wealth  and 
greatness.  His  description  of  what  he  had  seen  in  all  this 
noble  territory  stirred  up  an  enthusiasm  in  the  already 
peopled  districts  of  New  South  Wales,  and  in  the  mother 
country,  which  led  at  once  to  notable  results. 

Thus  was  founded  the  province  of  Port  Phillip,  as  it  was 
termed  during  the  fifteen  years  in  which  it  flourished  as  a 
portion  of  New  South  Wales. 

In  memorable  contrast  with  its  busy  history  since  1835, 
was  the  career  of  its  single  white  inhabitant  throughout  the 
previous  term  of  thirty  years. 

Of  the  many  convicts  who  escaped  from  Colonel  Collins's 
short-lived  settlement  in  1803,  one,  and  apparently  the  only 


IP. 

000,000 

,11(1  with 

i  Phillip. 

mod  pve- 

by  John 

list,  and, 

bank  of 

o  bccoino 

aarrels  of 

ey  helped 

scenes  of 

iland  dis- 
and  183G. 
■ough    the 
3  DarUiig, 
yet  more 
3-lands,  to 
Je  visited 
d  Henty's 
d,  he  had 
istricts  of 
■e  roughly 
ihat  seems 
ealth  and 
in  all  this 
e  already 
e  mother 

as  it  was 
dshed  as  a 

since  1835, 
ighout  the 

il  Collins's 
ly  the  only 


WILLIAM  BUCKLEY'S  ADVENTURES. 


243 


one   who  was  not  lost  in  the  bush  or  did  not  return  to 
captivity,  was  WiUiani  Buckley,  then  a  strong  man  about 
twenty-four  years  old,  and  six  feet  five  inches  in  height. 
Witii  three  others  he  made  his  escape  and  traversed  the 
whole  circuit  of  Port  Phillip.     Soon  after  that  he  lost  sight 
of  his  comrades,  and  for  more  than  thirty  yoars  he  had  no 
intercourse  with  any  Englishman.     At  first  ho  wandered 
about  alone  on  the  sea-shore,  or  lived  in  a  hut  of  his  own 
building.     Then  a  tribe  of  natives  came  in  his  way,  and  by 
them  ho  was  treated  with  higli  honour.     '  These,  as  well  as 
other  Australian  natives,'  we  are  told,  'had  a  superstitious 
belief  that  white  people  are  persons  of  their  own  race  who 
have  come  to  life  again  after  death.     If  such  resuscitated 
persons  are  deemed  to  be  their  own  friends,  the  tribe  will 
treat  them  well.     Buckley  came  upon  the  scene  opportunely 
in  this  respect.     A  chief  of  the  tribe  with  which  he  after- 
wards lived  had  died  about  the  time  he  was  spending  his 
first  summer  of  wild  independence  near  the  Port  Phillip 
Heads,  and  had  been  buried  near  his  rude  domicile.     A 
piece  of  a  native  spear  had  been  left  to  mark  the  grave. 
Buckley  had  seen  and  appropriated  this  fragment,  and,  as 
he  carried  it  in  his  hand  when  first  seen  by  the  tribe,  they 
joyfully  hailed  him  as  no  other  than  their  deceased  chief 
come  again  to  life.     In  accordance  with  this  happy  pre- 
possession, Buckley  found  he  was  always  well  cared  for. 
He  often  saw  himsei^^  indeed  to  be  the  subject  of  very  ardent 
and  earnest  discussion,  and  on  the  occasion  of  the  frequent 
tribal  battles,  he  was  carefully  secluded  among  the  females 
so  as  to  be  out  of  harm's  way.'*     Once,  or  more  than  once, 
weury  of  his  life  among  the  natives,  he  went  back  to  his 
hut,  though  there  a  native  woman  installed  herself  as  his 
wife,  and  helped  him  to  collect  the  shell-fish,  herbs,  and 
fruits  on  which  he  subsisted.     Having  gradually  acquired 
the  language  of  the  aborigines,  he  gained  fresh  influence 
over  them,  which  he  was  able  to  use  to  his  own  and  their 
advantage,  whenever  he  chose  to  mix  with  them.     Thus  he 

*  Westgarth, '  Tht  Culouy  of  Victoria,'  pp.  47,  48. 

16—2 


■i 


I  w  i 


V   ' 


ill- 


•  SI 

•  51 


1,    T 

-   31 

«  ... 


!  ii 

i?" 

Jl 

'  ml. 

si: 


Li 


n,: 


244     A^^^  SOUTH  WALES  AND  PORT  PHILLIP. 

lived  till  he  was  fifty-five,  now  and  then  seeing  a  ship's  sail 
paasin<^'  along  the  coast,  but  failing  to  make  any  signal 
which  might  enable  him  to  return  to  his  own  countrymen, 
if  indeed  lie  greatly  cared  to  do  so. 

The  one  and  thirty  years  passed  so  easily  that  Buckley 
imagined  they  were  only  about  twenty,  when  he  heard  that 
a  party  of  white  men  had  come  to  settle  in  the  neighbour- 
hood, and  that  a  plan  was  being  hatched  by  the  natives  for 
murdering  them.  To  warn  them  of  the  danger,  he  souglit 
them  out,  and,  very  soon  after  the  appearance  of  Batman's 
party  at  Indented  Head,  showed  himself  among  thein. 
Great  was  their  astonislnnent  at  seeing  a  man,  evidently  no 
Australian,  though  more  than  thirty  years  of  nakedness  had 
half-browned  his  skin,  who  vainly  tried  to  address^  them  in 
their  own  language.  Hardly  even  could  he  understand  their 
speech  to  him,  until  one,  cutting  a  slice  from  a  loaf,  offered 
him  *  bread.'  That  word  acted  like  a  spell.  He  was  able  to 
converse  in  broken  terms,  and  soon  regained  his  native 
language.  To  Batman,  in  his  dealings  with  the  natives,  he 
was  very  useful,  until  his  disgust  at  the  treachery  shown 
towards  the  men  who  had  been  his  protectors  during  so  long 
a  time  caused  him  to  hold  aloof  from  the  negotiation.  For  a 
few  years  he  lived  in  the  new  town  of  Melbourne,  whence 
he  afterwards  went  l  j  Hobart  Town,  and  there  he  died  in 
1857. 

Poor  Buckley  had  little  reason  to  be  satisfied  with  the  new 
tide  of  enterprise  that  invaded  the  districts  over  which  he 
had  wandered  so  long.  '  One  great  cause  of  his  distress,' 
we  are  told,  'was  the  mutual  ill-will  and  misunderstand- 
ing that  were  daily  extending  between  the  colonists  and 
the  natives.  The  former,  pouring  in  one  after  another  with 
their  flocks,  rushed  away  with  hot  haste  into  the  interior, 
anxious  to  receive  a  share  of  the  fine  pastures  lying  still 
unoccupied,  and  ready  at  Nature's  hand  for  immediate  use. 
It  was  Buckley's  earnest  wish  that  the  poor  natives,  whose 
territories  were  thus  summarily  disposed  of  over  their  heads, 
should  be  approached  with  consideration  on  the  subject,  and 


JP, 


THE  SETTLEMENT  OF  PORT  PFfnJJP.        245 


ip's  sail 
y  signal 
itrymen, 

Buckley 
sard  that 
lighbour- 
itives  for 
e  sought 
3atman's 
ig   them, 
lently  no 
liiess  had 
i^  them  in 
and  their 
if,  offered 
as  able  to 
lis  native 
atives,  he 
ry  shown 

ig  so  long 
in.    For  a 

,  whence 
|e  died  in 

the  new 
rhich  he 
distress,' 

Iderstand- 
lists  and 

Ither  with 
interior, 
dng  still 
liate  use. 
;s,  whose 
jir  heads, 
jject,  and 


with  a  patient  effort  to  gain  their  consent  and  good-will,  and 
he  thougiit  that  ho  might  himself  have  boon  succcHHful  in 
dealing  with  them.  But  as  all  such  preliminaries  seenKul 
mere  waste  of  time  to  our  eager  and  competing  colonists, 
there  was  a  lamentable  result  between  tlicm  and  tlio  natives 
in  constant  mutual  distrust,  frequent  hostilities,  and  repeated 
atrocities  on  either  side.  Many  of  the  natives  wore  shot 
down  as  though  little  better  than  so  much  game  ;  and  they, 
in  their  turn,  stole  sheep  and  murdered  shepherds  as  often 
as  their  fewer  means  and  opportunities  gave  them  the 
power.'*  But  ugly  work  of  that  sort  has  attended  nearly 
all  intercourse  between  Englishmen  and  the  inferior  races 
whom  they  have  had  to  dispossess  in  their  career  of  colonial 
aggrandizement ;  and  perhaps  it  was  less  extensive  and  dis- 
graceful in  the  Port  Phillip  District  than  in  many  other  parts 
of  the  world. 
The  new  settlement  grew  apace.     On  the  25tli  of  May, 

1836,  it  contained  an  English  population  of  177,  and  in  April, 

1837,  the  number  of  colonists  had  risen  to  450.  In  tho 
previous  month  Sir  Kichard  Bourke,  the  governor  of  New 
South  Wales,  had  visited  the  colony,  and  superintended  the 
laying  out  of  the  towns  of  Melbourne  and  Geelong.  The 
land  therein  was  sold  by  auction.  One  half  -  acre  in 
Melbourne  realized  £80,  more  tlian  double  the  usual  price. 
Two  years  afterwards  it  was  re-sold  for  £5,000,  and  about 
twelve  years  later  it  was  sold  again  for  £40,000. 

In  1835,  on  the  first  report  of  the  new  settlement,  it  was 
formally  claimed  as  a  province  of  New  South  Wales.  In 
1836  Captain  William  Lonsdale  was  sent  to  act  as  chief 
magistrate  and  representative  of  the  Sydney  Government. 
In  1839  he  was  succeeded  by  Mr.  Charles  Joseph  Latrobe, 
who,  first  as  superintendent  and  afterwards  as  governor, 
directed  the  affairs  of  Port  Phillip  during  fifteen  years. 
Captain  Lonsdale  being  his  able  secretary.  The  limits  of 
his  jurisdiction  at  first  comprised  about  half  of  the  present 
territory,  excluding  Gipps  Land  and  most  of  the  Murray 

*  Westgarth,  p.  55. 


I   ! 


ii 

111  '< 

I 

'    ■■*'    I 


'"f 


III 


;  iv-.r 


I 


I; 


3. 


?4^:.     NEIV  SOUTH  WALES  AND  PORT  PHILLIP. 

and  Wimmera  Districts.  In  1842  these  regions  were  added 
to  it ;  and  the  Port  PhilHp  District,  also  called  the  Southern 
District  of  New  South  Wales,  was  enlarged  to  the  dimensions 
of  the  more  modern  Victoria,  comprising  an  a/ea  of  86,331 
square  miles.  Then,  too,  it  was  admitted  to  a  share  in  the 
new  constitution  given  to  New  South  Wales.  The  Legisla- 
tive Council  was  now  made  to  consist  of  fifty-four  members, 
eighteen  of  whom  were  nominated  by  the  Crown,  the  rest 
being  elected  by  all  the  colonists  entitled  to  the  franchise, 
fixed  at  a  £20  annual  rental.  Six  out  of  the  thirty-six  re- 
presentatives were  chosen  in  the  Port  Phillip  District. 

The  progress  of  New  South  Wales  up  to  1839  has  already 
been  described.  The  good  Sir  Eichard  Bourke,  after  a  brief 
interregnum,  was  succeeded  as  governor  by  Sir  George  Gipps 
in  1838.  The  change  was  not  fortunate,  though  the  new 
governor,  a  high-minded  but  rather  tyrannical  ruler,  was 
not  to  a  great  extent  responsible  for  the  troubles  that  arose 
during  his  term  of  office.  While  the  Port  Phillip  District 
was  rising  in  importance,  the  older  and  central  portion  of 
New  k^outh  Wales  suffered  some  serious  reverses.  New 
immigrants  arrived  in  large  numbers,  and  trade  was  active, 
but  this  show  of  prosperity  was  fictitious.  Perhaps,  indeed, 
both  trade  and  immigration  extended  for  a  time  too  rapidly. 
At  any  rate,  during  the  first  few  years  follov  ng  the  confer- 
ment of  the  new  constitution,  in  1842,  there  was  a  speedy 
faUing  back  of  the  old  tide  of  wealth.  '  It  was  notorious,' 
said  a  speaker  in  the  Lpf^iolative  Council,  '  that  in  1843  and 
1844  nine-tenths  of  the  houses,  lands,  and  mansions  of  the 
proprietors  were  mortgaged  up  to  their  full  value.  As  to  the 
squatting  interest,  it  was  known  that  gentlemen  with  10,000 
sheep  could  not  get  credit  for  a  bag  of  sugc.i^  or  a  chest  of 
tea.  The  merchants  were  without  custom,  traders  without 
business,  and  mechanics  and  artizans  were  pining  for  want 
in  the  streets.'  The  Government  was  not  very  wise  in  its 
efforts  to  improve  this  state  of  things  ;  but  unreasonable 
complaints  were  made  against  it  by  the  opposition  party 
that  grew  up  in  the  Legislative  Council  and  throughout  the 


JP. 

re  added 
southern 
nensions 
.f  86,331 
re  in  the 
Legisla- 
nembers, 
the  rest 
ranchise, 
fcy-six  re- 
let. 

s  ah'eady 
er  a  brief 
L'ge  Gipps 
the  new 
iiler,  was 
bat  arose 
)  District 
)ortion  of 
3S.     New 
as  active, 
,  indeed, 
apidly. 
confer- 
a  speedy 
Dtorious,' 
843  and 
Qs  of  the 
f\s  to  the 
h  10,000 
chest  of 
without 
for  want 
ise  in  its 
asonable 
n  party 
out  the 


PROGRESS  IN  NEW  SOUTH  WALES. 


2^1 


J  r 


colony.  Faction  prevailed,  which,  if  it  issued  in  good,  also 
brought  fresh  difficulties  to  the  settlement.  This  time  of 
trouble,  however,  was  perhaps  only  a  necessary  sequel  to 
the  change  by  which  New  South  Wales  passed  finally  from 
its  first  condition  as  a  great  receptacle  for  convicts  into  the 
hands  of  free  and  self-governing  colonists. 

The  tide  of  fortune  soon  set  in  again,  and  now  the 
prosperity  of  the  colony  resulted  more  than  ever  from  the 
squatters,  and  their  zeal  in  sheep-farming  and  preparing 
wool  for  the  European  market.  '  A  "  squatter,"  '  we  are 
told,  '  is  a  term  first  applied  to  the  early  emigrant  in 
America,  who  settled  or  squatted  down  upon  a  small  piece 
of  land  in  tha  forest  there,  cleared  it  of  the  native  timber, 
and  grew  wheat  or  ot^or  grain  and  vegetables  upon  it,  suffi- 
cient for  the  maintenance  of  his  own  family.  The  surplus 
he  disposed  of  at  any  market  convenient  to  the  spot  on 
which  he  squatted.  The  American  squatters,  as  a  class,  are 
generally  persons  oi  mean  repute  and  small  means,  who 
have  taken  unauthorized  possession  of  those  patches  of  land. 
The  squatters  of  New  South  Wales  form  a  very  different 
class  of  persons.  They  are  amongst  the  wealthiest  in  the 
land,  occupying,  by  the  tenure  of  Crown  leases  or  annual 
licenses,  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  of  acres.  Young 
men  of  good  family  and  connection  in  England,  retired 
oflicers  of  the  army  and  navy,  graduates  of  Oxford  and 
Cambridge,  are  all  amongst  them.  To  these  must  be  added 
most  of  the  settlers,  a  class  of  persons  who  lease  large  tracts 
of  land  in  their  own  right,  obtained  by  purchase  or  free 
grant  from  the  Crown,  but  wliich,  by  reason  of  the  land 
soon  becoming  insufficient  for  the  support  of  their  rapidly 
increasing  herds  and  f!''x^ks,  oblige  them  to  take  up  stations, 
as  it  is  termed,  in  unoccupied  parts  of  the  country  ;  so  that 
the  principal  settl(;rs  are  also  the  principal  squatters — 
settlers  as  to  their  own  lands,  squatters  as  to  the  Crown 
lands  they  occupy.'* 

The  method  of  squatting  and  the  nature  of  its  services  in 

*  Tlierry,  pp.  240,  241. 


A 


ill 


'i' 

!  I:  i; 


s 

i 

i 


H 


•  It 


h 


.  71 
•  ti 

-    :i 


!     i 
i  it 


1    . 


-Iij 


Ji 


'I 

I 

ail 


24S     A'/r IF  SOUTH  WALES  AND  PORT  PHILLIP. 

the  development  of  New  Soutli  Wales  will  best  bo  sliowii  by 
quoting  here  part  of  a  squatter's  own  narrative  of  liis  career. 
'  In  the  month  of  June,  1832,'  he  said,  '  being  then  twenty 
years  of  age,  1  left  Glasgow  for  Sydney.     I  was  induced  to 
do  so  from  reading  a  book  upon  Australia.     My  father,  who 
was  an  extensive  farmer  near  Glasgow,  having  asked  me, 
while  at  home  during  the  holidays,  to  assist  at  some  work 
upon  the  farm,  I  became  rather  discontented,  and  told  him 
I  had  read  such  favourable  accounts  of  New  South  Wales 
that  I  wished  he  would  allow  me  to  go  there.     He  said  he 
would  pay  my  passage  out  and  give  me  £50  to  bring  me 
home,  as  he  knew  I  would  not  remain  long  there.     On  my 
arrival  in  Sydney  I  delivered  several  letters  of  introduction, 
but  found  them  of  no  use.     A  list  of  passengers  who  had 
come  out  in  the  ship  having  been  published  in  the  Sydney 
papers,  and  my  name  appearing  with  the  description  of 
"  farmer  from  Scotland,"  I  had  several  inquiries  from  stock- 
holders to  ascertain  what  I  was  going  to  do.     Among  others 
w\T,s  Mr.  Cadell,  and  he  recommended  me  very  strongly  to 
see  the  Colonial  Secretary,  Alexander  M'Leay,  Esq.,  who 
was  then  in  want  of  a  manager.     Being  admitted  to  a  per- 
sonal interview  with  that  worthy  and  kind-hearted  man,  I 
entered  into  an  engagement  with  him  to  take  charge  of  his 
station,  about  150  miles  from   Sydney,  with  about   2,000 
sheep,  at  a  salary  of  £1:0  a  year,  with  one  per  cent,  upon 
the  clip  of  wool  the  first  year,  and  an  additional  one  per 
cent,  each  succeeding  year.     In  eight  or  ten  days  I  left 
Sydney  for  his  station,  situated   between   Goulburn   and 
Yass.     On  arriving   at   the  station   the   person  in  charge 
handed  over  to  me  the  sheep,  with  some  stores,  and  about 
a  dozen  assigned  convict  servants,  and  he  left  on  the  same 
day.     I  now  found  myself,  without  any  colonial  experience, 
placed  alone  in  a  position  of  great  responsibility.     In  the 
first  place,  I  made  myself  acquainted  with  the  nature  of  the 
country,  the  sheep,  and  the  servants  I  had  to  deal  with.     I 
gave  additional  allowances  to  those  servants  who  proved 
themselves  honest  and  careful.     The  result  of  this  system, 


it! 


• 


own  by 
carocr. 
twenty 
uoed  to 
Di",  who 
:ed  me, 
le  work 
)ld  him 
I  Wales 
said  he 
•ing  me 
On  my 
luction, 
ho  had 
Sydney 
)tion  of 
a  stock- 
7  others 
ingly  to 
,,  who 
a  per- 
man,  I 
of  his 
2,000 
upon 
ine  per 
I  left 
n   and 
charge 
about 
1  same 
dence, 
[n  the 
1  of  the 
bh.     I 
)roved 
fstem, 


A  SQUATTER'S  HISTORY. 


249 


togetlier  with  a  careful  and  economical  management,  was  a 
rapid  and  steady  increase  in  the  flocks.  In  1830  a  severe 
disease  broke  out  among  the  sheep,  which  spread  rapidly, 
and  in  some  instances  almost  exterminated  the  flocks  of 
many  of  the  settlers.  My  loss  did  not  exceed  one-fifth  of 
the  entire  stock  during  the  three  or  four  years  that  this 
disease  prevailed.  I  had  observed  that,  even  when  in  per- 
fect health,  the  sheep  were  fond  of  licking  rock-salt,  and 
that  they  evidently  improved  upon  it.  I  therefore  resolved 
on  forming  a  station  on  the  Murrumbidgee,  where  I  had 
heard  of  the  existence  of  salt-bush  plains,  and  there  I  took 
up  a  tract  of  country  with  thirty  miles  of  frontage  to  the 
river  for  Mr.  M'Leay,  and  about  two  miles  of  frontage  for 
myself.  I  had  to  pay  £10  a  year,  and  Mr.  M'Leay  about 
£30  for  his  stations.  These  proved  excellent  and  healthy 
runs,  but,  being  farther  out  than  any  squatter,  I  found  at 
first  some  difficulty  with  the  natives,  who  were  inclined  to 
attack  the  sliepherds  and  drive  off  sheep.  By  treating 
them  with  kindness,  however,  I  succeeded  in  making  them 
useful  in  sheep-washing  and  such-like  work.  I  had  also 
then,  being  400  miles  from  Sydney,  great  difficulty  in  getting 
up  provisions — a  difficulty  which  was  increased  when,  a  few 
years  afterwards,  I  pushed  out  100  miles  farther,  and  took 
up  additional  stations  on  the  Lachlan  Biver.  During  the 
last  <'ow  years,  whilst  I  was  in  charge  of  Mr.  M'Leay's 
stations,  I  ha*^  been  also  engaged  in  purchasing  sheep  for 
myself.  Upon  iny  ceasing  to  act  for  him,  he  made  me  a 
present  of  1,000  picked  ewes,  which,  with  the  sheep  I  had 
already  purchased  for  myself,  gave  me  a  considerable  stock 
to  go  on  upon.  Soon  after,  about  the  years  1842-1844,  so 
great  was  the  depreciation  of  all  kinds  of  colonial  produce, 
that,  although  my  flocks  v/ere  healthy  and  increasing  in 
number,  I  found,  in  common  with  all  other  settlers,  the 
greatest  difficulty  in  obtaining  the  necessary  money  to  meet 
my  current  obiigatious,  such  as  wages,  supplies  for  the 
stations,  an-d  the  like ;  and  it  was  only  by  exercising  the 
strictest  ecomomy,  and  by  having  saved  a  small  amount, 


111 


I 
4 


-Ji  : 


^  


1'  1        ' 


1 1 


1      ' 

\  !      i 


[  J 


1 1 


;  «  .1' 


250     AVs /F  SOUTH  WALES  AND  PORT  PHILLIP. 

whicli  now  proved  very  valuablo,  tlmt  I  escaped  being 
obliged  to  part  \vitli  my  slicep  for  almost  nothing — the  fate 
of  many  at  a  time  when  produce  of  all  kinds  was  misaleablc, 
and  an  advance  of  money  could  only  be  obtained  upon  ruin- 
ous terms.  But  in  the  year  1845  a  considerable  rise  took 
place  in  the  price  of  stock,  from  the  fact  of  their  value,  when 
boiled  down  for  tallow,  having  been  ascertained  by  Mr. 
Henry  O'Brien,  of  Yass  Plains  ;  and  about  the  same  time 
an  annual  assessment  was  laid  upon  sheep  and  cattle,  for 
tlie  purpose  of  increasing  the  colonial  revenues.  As  our 
])ro(its  increased,  the  Government  increased  our  taxation. 
The  present  stock  upon  my  stations  ' — in  18G3 — '  consists  of 
about  100,000  sheep,  from  7,000  to  8,000  head  of  cattle,  and 
from  700  to  800  head  of  horses.  This  is  the  amount  inde- 
pendent of  the  annual  reductions  by  the  sale  of  a  consider- 
able portion  to  the  butcher  for  meat,  and  of  supplies  to 
new  squatters,  and  support  of  the  men  employed  on  the 
station.'* 

That  squatter's  history  illustrates  the  career  of  thousands 
of  enterprising  colonists  in  Australia.  Starting  from  Sydney, 
they  gradually  extended  their  sheep  farms  inland  and  far 
down  to  the  south,  till,  crossing  the  Murrumbidgee,  and 
entering  Australia  Felix,  they  met  like  adventurers  who  had 
gone  north,  east,  and  west  from  Melbourne,  and  by  their 
enterprise  raised  the  Port  Phillip  District  to  importance. 
In  1846  the  central  provinces  of  New  South  Wales  contained 
154,534  inhabitants,  and  there  were  32,879  in  Port  Phillip, 
while  the  colonial  sailors  in  all  the  ports  numbered  2,19(3, 
making  the  entire  population  189,609,  considerably  more 
than  twice  as  great  as  it  had  been  ten  years  before.  In 
Marcli,  1851,  the  entire  population  had  risen  to  247,262 — 
189,951  in  New  South  Wales  proper  and  77,345  in  Port 
Phillip.     About  ten  million  sheep  were  then  collected  iu 

*  Therry,  pp.  259-205.  '  After  twenty-eight  ye.ars  of  meritorious  toil,' 
says  ^Ir.  Therry  of  this  siiuatter,  '  ho  returned  to  I'^ngland  with  a  perma- 
nent well -assure!  income  (wliich  I  believe  I  much  understate)  of  between 
A;20,000  and  Jt;3U,<j00  a  year.' 


!  \ 


UP. 

icd  being 
—the  fate 
nsaleablc, 
ipon  ruin- 
rise  took 
,luc,  ^vhen 
\  by  Mr. 
amc  time 
cattle,  for 
.     As  our 
■  taxation, 
consists  of 
jattlc,  and 
Dunt  inde- 
i,  consider- 
upplies  to 
ed  on  the 

thousands 
HI  Sydney, 
d  and  far 
dgee,  and 
•s  who  had 
by  their 
iportance. 
contained 
t  Phillip, 
ed  2,196, 
,bly  more 
fore.     In 
1247,262— 
Is  in  Port 
fllected  in 

torious  toil,' 

Ith  a  pernia- 

of  between 


GRO  WTNG  Sr.  TTL  r.MKXTS. 


!5i 


the  various  squatters'  stations,  and  the  wool  produced 
from  thoni  and  imported  to  Europe  was  worth  about 
£1,500,000. 

In  that  year,  as  we  shall  see,  wool  ceased  to  be  the  one 
great  staple  of  Australian  commerce.  The  gold  discoveries 
afforded  a  new  and  more  glittering  field  for  ejiterprise,  by 
which  the  whole  continent  was  to  be  enriched,  and  tlie 
fortunate  district  of  Port  Phillip  was  to  be  especially  aided 
in  its  rapid  career  of  prosperity.  But  already  the  young 
settlement  had  made  wonderful  advances,  and  was  threaten- 
ing to  outrun  tlie  parent  colony  in  the  race  of  wealtii. 
Starting  with  its  population  of  177  in  18.36,  it  had  11,738 
inhabitants  in  1841  ;  and,  as  has  been  just  said,  32,879  in 
1846,  and  77,345  in  1851.  Of  these,  22,143  were  in  the 
town  of  Melbourne,  about  8,000  in  Geelong,  and  the  remain- 
ing 36,000,  or  more,  were  distributed  in  Belfast,  Portland, 
and  other  smaller  towns  and  villages  along  and  near  the 
coast,  both  east  and  west,  and  among  the  settlements  and 
squatting  stations  spread  over  the  fertile  regions  stretching 
up  to  the  northern  limits  of  the  province. 

The  development  of  Melbourne  within  this  short  space  of 
time,  at  the  close  of  which  it  was  still  in  its  infancy,  illus- 
trates the  progress  of  the  whole  district  of  Port  Pliillip. 
'  In  January,  1838,'  we  are  told, '  it  consisted  of  a  nucleus  of 
huts,  embowered  in  the  forest  foliage,  and  had  much  the 
appearance  of  an  Indian  village.  Two  wooden  houses 
served  the  pui'posc  of  inns  for  the  settlers  who  frequented 
the  place.  A  small  square  wooden  building,  with  an  old 
ship's  bell  suspended  from  a  tree,  was  used  as  a  church  or 
chapel  by  the  various  religious  denominations.  Two  or 
three  so-called  shops  formed  emporiums  for  the  sale  of  every 
description  of  useful  articles.  The  flesh  of  the  kangaroo  and 
varieties  of  wild  fowl  were  abundantly  used,  for  fresh 
mutton  was  still  scarce,  and  beef  seldom  seen.  A  manuscript 
newspaper,  established  by  Fawkner,  one  of  the  enterprising 
men  to  whom  England  is  indebted  for  the  formation  of  this 
settlement,  was   the   organ  of  public  opinion  in  the  new 


il 
il 


2.q.T    xr.w  S(U'TJi  jr.urs  .rv/)  /v'A'/'  run.i.ir. 


1 


A 


1  1 


I 


■    g  mi 

■  •••  % 

'if'  till 

Sill 


!  l\\: 


.  wlony.'*     Hriok  housos  Hooti  took  M»o  pliico  of  wood,  and  in 
tlio  courso  of  a  fow  y<^ii''H  liaiidsonio  hiiildinf^H  of  Htono  nv(m-o 
croottHl  for  public  uhi^s.     \Vi<lo  )"oads  w(>ro  huivUcmI  out.  iind 
markot-pl.'U'j^s  woro  apjwiutiMl.     '  Tlio  HiroolH,'  it  nuH  said  in 
1810,  '  aro  ]ilanMod  at  v'\^\\l  an^Hos,  tlio  lar^or  onr^H  luMtif;  a 
hundrod  foot  broad,  tho  HinalKM-  about  tbirty.    Tho  principal 
Htnvt  is,  strangely  (Munigb,  named  (loUinn,  after  tbo  l)ravn 
otVu'or  wbo,  wluMi  diroctod  in  ISO.'l  to  form  a  HcttlonuMit  at 
Port  riiillip,  dodarotl  it  to  bo  "all  barren,"  and  abandoiUMJ 
it  as  a  bopelesH  undertaking.     Mli/abetb  Street  is  nituated  in 
a  lioUow  between  two  considerable  acdivititm  to  tbo  (vist- 
ward  and  westward,  called  tbe  Mastern  and   Western  Jlills. 
Tlie  strei^ts  and  byways  of  Melbourne,  previous  to    IHl'J, 
were  frecpiently  rendered  impassable  from  tbo  operation  of 
tbe  weatber  and  tbe  ceaseless  tralVic  of  ponderous  bullock- 
drays.     Tbick  gum-tree  stumps  and  deej)  ruts,  fornn'ng  vast 
reservoirs  of  mud,  were  varied  by  tbo  intersecting  gullies  of 
temporary  watercourses;  anti  many  an  anxious  wife  and 
motlier  scanned  tbe  deep  abyss  of  tbo  urban  excavations  in 
searcb  of  a  druidven  busband  or  wayward  cbild.     A  visitor, 
writing  in  ISl'J,  declares  bimself  to  bavo  been  startled,  soon 
after  bis  arrival  in  tbe  colony,  by  a  paragrapb  in  tbe  news- 
paper,  beaded  "  Anotber  cbild    drowned  in  tbe  streets  of 
Melbourne."     In  tbo  following  year,  bowevor,  tbe  stumps 
were  removed  by  order  of  tbe  town  council,  and  tbo  occa- 
sion of  frccpient  accidents  was  tbus  removed.    On  tbo  south 
bank  of  tbe  Yarra  Yarra,  witbin  a  distance  of  tbreo  miles 
from  Melbourne,  tbero  aro  many  pretty  cottages,  surrounded 
by  fertile  and  productive  gardens,  extending  over  a  gontly 
undulating  declivity  to  tbo  water's  edge.     Tho  beauty  of  tho 
scenery  is  enbanccd  by  bills  and  bold  woodlands  in  tho 
background.     The  country  between  Melbourne  and  Western 
Port  is  a  vast  forest,  broken  at  regular  intervals  by  a  suc- 
cession of  hills  and  valleys,  which  present  many  picturesque 
views. 't 

A  terrible  disaster,  the  worst  of  many  such,  befell  that 

*  Martin,  vol.  ii.,  p.  b9S.  f  Ibid.,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  599,  600. 


VOUNC,   VICTOTUA. 


253 


bnautiful  rof^'ioti  in  IHOI,  atul  occaHionod  much  rrn'Hory  at 
fclio  limo,  Uiou^'li  it  proparod  tlio  way  for  biiHi(!r  and  rnoro 
prrmporoiiH  occupation  of  tlio  land.  '  A  raco  with  a  huHh-firfi 
in  Victoria  in  tlio  Hinnrncr  iw  no  unco»nrnon  tliin^/  wo  aro 
told  ;  'fitit  Hucli  a  l)UHli-(iro  an  that  wliicli  occurred  on  tho 
(il.h  of  Fohruary,  lH5i,  in  without  a  paralh;!  in  tlio  hintory  of 
tho  country.  On  tho  morning' of  that  (hiy,  a  hot  wind  not  in, 
and  l)y  ohwon  o'clock  in  tho  forenoon  Iwid  incr(!aH(!d  alrnoHt 
to  a  Inirricatio  in  Mcilhourno,  juid  HW(!|)t  over  tho  faco  of  tho 
wholo  country,  huHh-OrcH  followinj^'  with  tho  rapidity  of 
li^'litnin^',  and  <lovourin^,' all  that  ntood  in  their  way.  ifad 
any  portion  of  Molhourno  taken  fire,  the  city  would  have 
heon  roduc(Ml  to  aHhew,  Jind  the  p(!OpIe  would  have  perinhed, 
an  no  offortH  of  theirH  coidd  have  Htaye<l  the  prof^resH  of  tfio 
llainoH,  or  have  enahhid  them  to  find  meariH  of  CKcape  for 
theinHelvoH.  Ah  it  waH,  they  kept  cIoho  in  their  Iiouhoh, 
liHtenin^  with  terror  to  tho  wind  outside,  and  tromhling  at 
tho  thought  of  what  was  ^oing  on  in  tho  country.  Some 
idea  of  tho  latter  may  ))0  formed  from  tho  accountH  which 
reached  Melbourne  from  hour  to  hour.  When  the  flames 
iirnt  appeared  in  tho  country,  Homo  endeavoured  to  stay 
them  in  tlio  usual  way  by  beating  them  out  with  wet  baf,'H  or 
bushes,  but  only  to  become  victirrm  to  their  devouring  force, 
and  to  bo  left  lifeless  on  tlio  ground.  Others,  who  had  left 
tiieir  homes  not  knowing  what  was  to  liappen,  had  either  to 
fly  on  horseback  out  of  tlio  lino  of  flames  to  the  nearest 
watcr-holo,  or  were  suddenly  caught  in  the  furiously-suffo- 
cating and  intcnscly-lieatcd  blast,  and  roasted  alive.  The 
flocks  and  herds  of  tho  settlers,  tho  wild  beasts  of  the  fields 
and  the  forests*,,  the  birds  of  prey,  the  very  reptiles  peeping 
out  of  their  holes,  all  having  life,  were  encircled  in  their 
attempts  at  escape,  and  were  overpowered  by  the  sweltering 
heat.  Forests  which  were  healthy  and  verdant  in  the  morn- 
ing presented  nothing  but  the  appearance  of  blackened 
trunks  in  tho  evening,  with  here  and  there  an  exception  in 
the  shape  of  one  on  fire.  The  destruction  of  life  and  pro- 
perty was  immense  ;  more  than  could  be  ascertained  then,  or 


254     NEIV  SOUTH  WALES  AND  PORT  PHILLIP. 


I    \¥' 


■1    Fr 


11 


If' 
if, 

< 
Ij!. 


!ll 


'.'' 


li  '8  i«. 

''*  '£  >■■ 

»   2    IP) 

•  a  "J 

W    ""I 


:    ,  I' 


ever  will  be  known.  Everywhere  the  devastating  influence 
of  the  storm  of  wind  and  flame  was  felt.  Ashes  were 
carried  from  Mount  Macedon  to  Melbourne  by  it,  a  distance 
of  forty-five  miles ;  fertile  districts  utterly  wasted ;  flocks 
and  herds  abandoned  by  their  owners  ;  the  settlers,  who  had 
escaped  with  their  lives,  destitute  ;  and  the  greatest  suffering 
everywhere  exhibited.  Well  might  the  6th  of  February, 
1851,  in  Victoria,  be  called  Black  Thursday!'* 

In  spite  of  that  calamity,  and  of  other  disturbing  incidents, 
Victoria  was  on  the  highway  to  prosperity  as  yet  undreamt 
of.  The  older  settlement  on  the  east  of  Australia  was  also 
prospering,  and  with  the  Melbourne  of  1849  may  be  com- 
pared the  Sydney  of  the  same  date.  The  capital  of  New 
South  Wales  was  sixty  years  old,  and  contained  about 
40,000  inhabitants,  with  nearly  10,000  more  in  its  suburbs, 
in  1849.  *  Its  haven,'  it  was  then  said,  '  which  is  about 
fifteen  miles  long,  and  in  some  places  three  miles  broad,  is 
completely  land-locked.  Along  the  water-side,  except  that 
portion  occupied  by  the  demesne  contiguous  to  Government 
House,  there  are  wharves,  stores,  ship-yards,  mills,  manu- 
factories, distilleries,  breweries,  etc.  Behind  these,  in  irre- 
gular succession,  rise  numerous  private  and  public  buildings. 
The  streets  are  laid  out  generally  at  right  angles.  Thirty- 
four  of  them  have  each  a  carriage-way  of  not  less  than 
thirty-six  feeF,  several  from  forty  to  sixty  feet,  and  a  foot- 
way of  not  less  than  twelve  feet.  Their  length  varies  from 
one  to  three  miles.  They  are  well  paved  or  macadamized, 
regularly  cleaned,  watered,  and  lit  with  gas.  George  Street 
and  Pitt  Street  have  continuous  ranges  of  handsome  stone 
or  brick  edifices,  with  shops  that  would  do  no  discredit  to 
Eegent  Street  or  Oxford  Street  in  London. 't 

Sydney  and  its  outlying  districts  had  shaken  off  the  con- 
tamination of  their  early  state  as  a  convict  settlement,  and 
the  vast  colony  of  New  South  Wales  was  now  a  thriving 
haunt  of  enterprising  freemen,  in  which  the  resources  already 

*  Allen,  •  History  of  Victoria,'  p.  87. 
t  Martin,  vol.  ii.,  p.  454. 


.LIP. 

influence 
5hes  were 
a  distance 
ed ;  flocks 
3,  who  had 
it  suflering 
February, 

;  incidents, 
undreamt 
\  was  also 
y  be  Goni- 
al of  New 
ned  about 
s  suburbs, 
li  is  about 
3  broad,  is 
xcept  that 
overnmeut 
lis,  mauu- 
se,  in  irre- 
buildings. 
.     Thirty- 
less  than 
d  a  foot- 
.ries  from 
idamized, 
Irge  Street 
J)me  stone 
Iscredit  to 

the  con- 

lent,  and 

thriving 

iS  already 


AFTER  SIXTY  YEARS. 


255 


brought  into  use  promised  for  it  almost  boundless  expansion 
although  a  new  and  yet  more  brilliant  means  of  its  advance- 
ment was  yet  to  be  discovered.     In  the  meanwhile,  more- 
over, another  Australian  colony  had  been  established,  and 
commenced  to  thrive ;  and  this  must  next  be  looked  at. 


mmm 


f:! 


^;i 


I ) 


ii    t 


IH  ! 


^* 

Si* 

"   Ml 
1   < 


'  e:  ii 

■  ai  "I 

'  jiw! 

-  4 

■  '•■«,| 

Hi? 


'  1 1 

■ 

•  M 

; 

r 

■^ 

.V-flWu-. 

V 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

SOUTH   AUSTRALIA. 

THE  DISCOVERY  AND  COLONIZATION  OF  MOUTH  AUSTRALIA— THE  W^KEPIKLD 
SCHEME  AND  ITS  FAILURE — EARLY  TUOUHLES  OF  THE  COLONY — THEIU 
SPEEDY  REMOVAL — THE  COPrKU  MINES — THE  EFFECT  OF  THE  GOLD  DIS- 
COVERIES  IN  VICTORIA — LATER  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COLONY  ;  COPPER,  WOOL, 
WHEAT,  AND  WINE— THE  NORTHERN  TERRITORY.      [1822-1888.] 

HE  south  coast  of  Australia  is  barren,  and  in  every 
respect  useless  and  unfavourable  for  coloniza- 
tion.' So  said  Captain  King,  one  of  the  most 
enterprising  followers  of  Captain  Flinders  in  the 
work  of  exploration  along  the  southern  shores  of 
the  great  island-continent,  in  1822.  Soon  after  that,  how- 
ever, in  1827  and  the  following  years.  Captain  Sturt  made 
his  famous  inland  expeditions  and  discoveries,  in  the  course 
of  which  he  tracked  the  INIurray  through  a  large  part  of  its 
winding,  and  visited  the  country  between  Lake  Victoria 
and  St.  Vincent's  Gulf,  now  the  splendid  harbour  of 
Adelaide.  His  report  was  very  different  from  Captain  King's. 
'  Cursory  as  my  glance  was,'  he  wrote  in  1829,  '  I  could  not 
but  think  I  was  leaving  behind  me  the  fullest  reward  of  our 
toil  in  a  country  that  would  ultimately  render  our  dis- 
coveries valuable.  My  eye  never  fell  on  a  region  of  more 
promising  aspect  or  of  more  favourable  position  than  that 
which  occupies  the  country  between  the  lake  and  the  ranges 
of  St.  Vincent's  Gulf,  and,  continuing  northerly,  stretches 
away  without  any  visible  boundary.' 


course 
t  of  its 
/"ictoria 
I)our  of 
King's, 
uld  not 
of  our 
iir  dis- 
f  more 
an  that 
ranges 
retches 


SO  UTH  A  U^  TKALIAA  COMMENCEMENTS.        257 

That  favourable  description  induced  the  Governor  of  New 
South  Wales,  in  ib3l,  to  send  Captain  Barker  on  a  visit  to 
the  country  around  Lake  Victoria,  with  a  view  of  deciding 
as  to  its  fitness  for  an  Englisli  settlement.  Captain  Barker 
was  attacked  and  killed  by  the  natives;  but  his  subordinate, 
Mr.  Kent,  w  nt  back,  to  speak  of  the  country  in^  terms  yet 
more  favourable  than  those  used  by  Captain  Sturf;.  Rich 
soil,  line  pasturage,  and  ample  supplies  of  fresh  water, 
ai'vays  a  great  attraction  in  Australia,  united,  he  said,  in 
making  the  district  one  *  in  whose  valleys  the  exile  might 
hope  to  build  for  himself  and  for  his  family  a  peaceful  and 
prosperous  retreat.' 

Prompt  measures  were  taken  for  enabling,  not  exiles,  but 
willing  adventurers,  to  find  peace  and  prosperity  in  the 
newly-explored  district.  The  movement,  however,  did  not 
begin  in  New  South  Wales,  which  had  already  founded  the 
convict  colony  of  Van  Diemen's  Land,  and  was  now  founding 
the  free  settlement  of  Port  Phillip.  The  project  for  establish- 
ing South  Australia  was  started  in  England  by  a  group  of 
philanthropists  and  speculators,  anxious  to  try  a  new  experi- 
ment in  colonization,  which  was  known  as  the  Wakefield 
scheme,  its  chief  advocate  being  Edward  Gibbon  Wakefield. 
In  the  older  Australian  colonies,  and  in  nearly  all  the 
other  dependencies  of  Great  Britain,  immigration  had  been 
encouraged  by  offers  of  land  at  very  low  prices,  and  as  the 
enterprise  of  the  first  settlers  made  property  more  valuable, 
the  land  was  still  disposed  of  for  whatever  price  it  could 
fetch  at  public  auction.  Wakefield  urged  a  different  policy. 
*  He  held  that,  by  placing  a  high  value  on  the  unreclaimed 
lands  of  a  new  country,  and  forwarding  a  labouring  popula- 
tion out  of  the  sale  of  those  lands,  the  emigrants  would  of 
necessity  wurk  at  low  wages,  as  the  purchase  of  the  dear 
lands  would  be  above  their  means,  thereby  securing  the 
capitalist  investing  in  the  land  a  large  interest  for  his 
money,  and  forming  at  once  a  community  of  labourers  and 
artisans  who  would  minister  to  the  benefits  of  the  land- 
holders.    Besides  these  large  landholders,  a  class  of  small 

17 


I 

H 

I      1!' 

il'l 

ii 
11' 


f? 


!58 


SOUTH  AUSTRALIA. 


1   ! 


IIM! 


'II 


'1' 


i 
\       < 

!     I 


i      ;  a 


2 


M 


lit' 


farmers  was  to  bo  induced  to  emigrate,  by  disposing  of  the 
land  in  small  sections  to  bo  cleared  and  cultivated  by  their 
families.'*  This  foolisli  plan  found  so  much  favour  that  a 
committee  for  its  adoption  was  formed  in  1831,  and  the 
committee  grew  into  a  South  Australian  Colonization 
Association,  founded  in  1834,  which  in  the  same  year 
obtained  a  charter  for  the  enforcement  of  its  views  in  the 
region  visited  by  Captain  Sturt. 

In  that  way  was  originated  the  colony  of  South  Australia, 
comprising  an  almost  square  block  of  about  300,000  square 
miles,  cut  out  of  the  south-western  part  of  the  original  New 
South  Wales.  A  large  capital  was  subscribed  ;  and  in  1836 
Captain  (afterwards  Sir  John)  Hiudmarsh  went  out  with 
the  first  party  of  intending  landowners,  or  their  agents, 
and  an  organized  body  of  *  surveyors,  architects,  engineers, 
clerks,  teachers,  lawyers,  and  clergymen.'  These  first  in- 
gredients for  a  ready-made  colony  landed  at  the  mouth  of 
the  Glenelg,  in  St.  Vincent's  Gulf,  in  December,  and  pro- 
ceeded seven  miles  up  the  river  to  lay  the  foundations  of 
Adelaide,  appointed  as  the  capital  of  the  settlement.  Other 
instalments  quickly  followed,  and  the  population  amounted 
to  6,000  in  1838,  and  to  10,000  in  1839. 

The  experiment  failed  dismally.  Captain  Hindmarsh  did 
not  satisfy  his  employers,  and  he  was  succeeded  by  Colonel 
Gawler  in  1838.  '  When  Colonel  Gawler  arrived  in  the 
colony,'  says  a  panegyrist  of  the  project,  '  he  found  the 
government  machinery  in  a  great  state  of  derangement. 
The  country  surveys  were  not  well  advanced.  Persons  who 
had  gone  out  with  land-orders  and  means  for  rendering  their 
agricultural  operations  profitable  had  fallen  into  land  specu- 
lations after  the  sale  of  town  allotments,  or  had  engaged  iu 
building  operations  at  a  high  cost  in  the  capital,  and  brought 
themselves  to  a  stand-still  Labourers,  who  ought  to  have 
been  dispersed  over  the  country,  were  congregated  in  the 
town,  demanding  and  receiving,  as  long  as  the  money  lasted, 
high  wages  for  works  that  could  not  be  remunerative  to  those 
*  Westgarth,  *  Australia,'  p.  21 5v 


THE  WAKEinELD  EXPERIMENT, 


259 


ig  of  tho 

by  their 
iir  that  a 

and  tho 
ionization 
amo  year 
iWS  in  tho 

AustraUa, 
)00  square 
ginal  New 
cid  in  1836 
,  out  with 
3ir  agents, 
engineers, 
se  first  iu- 
B  mouth  of 
r,  and  pro- 
ndations  of 
nt.     Other 
.  amounted 

Imarsh  did 
by  Colonel 
zed  in  the 
found  the 
-angement. 
arsons  who 
.ering  their 
land  specu- 
jengaged  iu 
id  brought 
it  to  have 
Ited  in  the 
tey  lasted, 
e  to  those 


who  constructed  them.  Tho  true  objects  of  colonization 
had  been  lost  sight  of  in  tho  wliirlof  speculative  excitement; 
and  when  the  funds,  brouglit  into  tho  colony  for  legitimate 
employment,  had  been  nearly  all  sent  away  for  tiio  purchaso 
of  provisions,  and  hundreds  of  tons  of  Hour  had  been  im- 
ported at  from  £80  to  £100  pur  ton,  which  should  Jiavc  been 
produced  on  tho  spot  for  £15  or  £20,  tho  prospect  of  a 
general  collapse  appeared  to  be  inevitable.'* 

It  was  not  averted  by  tho  measures  resorted  to  by  tlio  new 
governor.  Finding  his  colony  bankrupt  and  its  inhabitants 
on  the  verge  of  ruin,  if  not  of  starvation,  while  fresh  immi- 
grants, tempted  by  the  nominally  high  wages  and  tho 
fabulous  price  of  land  produced  by  stock- jobbing  manoeuvres, 
were  arriving,  he  was  led  by  a  mistaken  feeling  of  generosity 
to  embark  in  a  reckless  expenditure,  and  to  attempt  remedies 
which  only  increased  tho  disease.  Great  public  works  wero 
constructed  by  him  in  order  that  tlie  impoverisliod  residents 
might  get  wages ;  but  his  exchequer  was  empty,  and  ho  had 
to  pay  his  labourers  and  contractors  by  drafts  upon  tho 
imperial  treasury.  The  drafts,  being  wholly  unauthorized, 
were  dishonoured  ;  and  the  colony  was  only  saved  from 
utter  destruction  by  a  loan  from  the  English  Government. 

Colonel  Gawler,  who,  with  a  revenue  of  £20,000  a  year, 
had  incurred  expenses  to  seven  times  that  amount,  was 
recalled  ;  and  his  successor.  Captain — afterwards  Sir  George 
— Grey,  who  arrived  in  May,  1841,  was  instructed,  at  what- 
ever cost  of  temporary  trouble,  to  pursue  a  different  policy, 
and  one  likely  to  bring  about  a  better  state  of  affairs.  This 
he  did  with  praiseworthy  prudence  and  energy.  The  pro- 
jectors of  the  colony,  too,  had  already,  to  a  great  extent, 
learnt  the  folly  of  their  original  schemes,  and  where  they 
still  proposed  to  act  unwisely  they  were  prevented  by  the 
Government.  The  colony  ceased  to  be  a  private  speculation, 
and  became  a  Crown  dependency.  Many  of  the  mischief- 
makers  who  had  come  to  it  in  the  first  two  or  three  years 
now  quitted  it  in  disgust,  or,  ruinea  by  their  own  misdeeds, 

*  Forster,  •  South  Australia  :  its  Progress  and  Prosperity,'  p.  51. 

17—2 


% 


n 


(   I 


I  i 


H' 


!i 


CI  ill 

ti'K 

3,  «•.,  ' 

■Jigll 


260 


SOUTH  AUSTRALIA. 


sank  into  iiisigiiiiicance,  and  their  places  were  taken  by  fresh 
adventurers,  with  whom  came  crowds  of  new  immigrants, 
aware  of  the  evil  circumstances  with  which  they  had  to 
contend,  and  of  the  real  resources  of  the  country  by  vv^hich  it 
was  easy  for  wise  men  to  prosper. 

South  AustraHa  did  very  soon  begin  to  prosper.  The 
population  rose  from  14,610  in  1840  to  22,390  in  1845,  the 
acres  of  land  in  cultivation  from  2,503  to  26,218,  and  the 
value  of  colonial  exports  from  £15,650  to  £131,800.  But  in 
the  same  period  the  public  expenditure  had  sunk  from 
£169,966  to  £36,182,  the  number  of  public-houses  from  107 
to  85,  and  the  number  of  criminals  from  47  to  22. 

In  1845  Captain  Grey  left  South  Australia  to  be  Governor 
of  New  Zealand.  During  his  four  years'  rule  he  had 
rescued  the  colony  from  bankruptcy,  and  placed  it  in  the 
high  road  of  prosperity,  although  much  of  that  road  was 
still  to  be  rugged.  Under  his  encouragement,  and  by  the 
enterprise  of  the  newer  colonists,  portions  of  the  fertile  and 
beautiful  land  around  Adelaide  had  been  brought  under 
cultivation,  and  far  larger  tracts  had  been  appropriated  by 
sheep-farmers.  In  1845  large  quantities  of  wheat  and  other 
grain  were  exported,  though  more  than  half  the  exports  were 
in  wool,  amounting  to  1,331,888  pounds,  which  were  valued 
at  £72,236.  In  the  foll'jwing  years  the  wool  trade  continued 
to  increase  rapidly,  as  well  as  the  commerce  in  corn  and 
various  other  articles  of  food. 

But  another  commodity  was  destined  to  become  the  main 
source  of  Soul-h  Australian  wealth.  In  1842  co^^per  was 
found  at  Kapunda,  fifty  miles  north-east  of  Adelaide,  and  iu 
the  followring  year  the  first  ton  of  ore  raised  there  yielded 
£23.  Even  before  that  lead  had  been  discovered,  and  the 
mines  continued  to  be  worked  successfully  ;  though  soon  the 
costlier  metal  became  a  far  more  important  article  of  trade. 
The  second  year's  yield  of  the  Kapunda  mine  produced 
£4,009,  and  the  third  £10,351. 

That  was  only  the  small  beginning  of  copper-mining  in 
the  colony.     In  1845  ore  was  found  by  a  shepherd  at  Burra 


'?'■ 


il'     i 


7 HE  GROWTH  OF  THE  COLONY. 


261 


1  by  fresh 
migrants, 
ly  had  to 
]  which  it 

)er.  The 
1845, the 
3,  and  the 
).  But  in 
iunk  from 
s  from  107 

3  Governor 
le  he  had 
i  it  in  the 
t  road  was 
and  by  the 
!  fertile  and 
aght  under 
opriated  by 
t  and  other 
xports  were 
were  valued 
e  continued 
Q  corn  and 

ne  the  main 
coj>per  was 
aide,  and  iu 
here  yielded 
ed,  and  the 
gh  soon  the 
cle  of  trade, 
le  produced 

3r-mining  in 
rd  at  Burra 


Burra,  about  forty  miles  north  of  Kapunda.  The  report  of 
his  discovery  caused  the  immediate  purchase  of  20,000 
acres  of  land  in  that  locality  by  two  rival  parties  of  adven- 
turers. 'These  two  parties,'  we  are  told,  'wore  called 
respectively  the  "  nobs  "  and  the  "  snobs,"  the  former  repre- 
senting the  aristocracy  of  the  colony,  the  latter  the  mer- 
chants and  tradespeople.  The  nobs  were  unwilling  to  com- 
bine with  the  snobs  in  a  joint-stock  company  for  carrying  on 
the  mine,  and  therefore,  although  they  united  to  purchase 
the  ground — as  neither  party  could,  unaided,  raise  the  hard 
cash — as  soon  as  the  eut'vey  was  completed  the  land  was 
divided  by  drawing  a  line  through  the  centre  from  east  to 
west.  Lots  were  then  drawn,  and  the  snobs  became  the 
fortunate  proprietors  of  this  northern  portion  of  the  survey.'* 
This  proved  an  all  but  boundless  source  of  wealth.  The  ore 
was  so  near  the  surface  that  it  could  almost  be  taken  up  by 
hand,  and  when  that  more  accessible  treasure  was  all 
appropriated,  the  working  of  the  lower  veins  was  found  to 
be  singularly  easy.  One  lucky  proprietor  who  had  risked 
£500  at  starting  was  three  years  afterwards  in  the  receipt 
of  £11,000  a  year.  During  the  first  six  years  80,000  tons  of 
ore  were  raised  at  Burra  Burra,  and  the  profits,  divided 
between  the  few  shareholders,  amounted  to  £438,552,  while 
a  larger  sum  went  to  enrich  the  labourers,  merchants,  and 
others,  who  had  come  to  aid  in  the  work,  and  by  whom 
during  the  period  a  busy  town  had  been  raised  on  the  old 
sheep-walk. 

Other  mines,  about  thirty  in  number,  were  also  found  and 
worked  within  the  distance  of  a  hundred  miles  from  Adelaide ; 
and  in  1849,  only  seven  years  after  its  first  discovery,  the 
copper  raised  from  all  exceeded  IG.OOO  tons,  and  was  worth 
£310,172.  In  1850  the  total  exports  from  South  Australia 
were  valued  at  £545,839,  and  the  population  of  the  colony 
was  63,700,  being  treble  that  of  1845. 

In  1851,  however,  a  wonderful  change  arose,  and  South 
Australia  had  to  pas'^  through  a  second  time  of  trouble.     Its 
*  AuHtiii,  '  Till!  MlncH  of  South  Australia.' 


5,- 
■  ( 

\r  1! 

Si  ■  'I  I 


'    1 


!!( 


'1! 


II! 


.1  I 


)  '  1 


ft 


1   ^'        I 


i       I 


1  •• 


::ii 


^     tlH 

'A 
'■<,, 

"'  '  "•11  . 

3,  ■•■■  I 


262 


SOUTH  AUSTRALIA. 


i  h 


copper,  its  wool,  and  its  wheat  had  promised  to  make  it 
before  long  the  richest  of  all  the  Australian  colonies,  richer 
even  than  its  nearest  rival,  Port  Phillip,  whicli  then  had  only 
wool  and  wheat  for  its  staple  articles  of  commerce.     J5ut 
the  promise  was  niarred  by  the  discovery  of  gold  in  that 
rival,  the  circumstances  and  issue  of  whicli  will  have  pn^ 
sontly  to  be  detailed.     The  immediate  issue  to  x*ort  Phillip 
was  very  disastrous.     '  For  a  time,'  it  was  reported  to  its 
Chamber  of  Commerce  in  1852,  '  it  seemed  that  the  props 
of  our  material  prosperity  wei"c  about  to  fall.     The  streets 
of  Adelaide  were  deserted,  houses  were  abandoned  by  their 
tenants,   rents   fell,   and   property   became   unmarketable. 
The  shops  of  our  retailers  presented  their  tempting  wares 
in  vain.     There  was  a  general  arrest  put  on  all  business ; 
and  this  at  a  time  when  the  stock  of  merchandise  in  the 
market  was  unprecedentedly  heavy,  and  when  the  bill  en- 
gagements of  the  mercantile  community  were  larger  probably 
than  they  had  ever  been  before.''*'     A  great  many  of  the 
busiest  labourers  in  South  Australia  being  miners,  they  im- 
mediately hurried  off  to  use  their  special  skill  in  seeking 
for  a  mineral  so  much  more  vah.n.ble  than  copper.     "Within 
twelve  months  about  16,000  p*^ .  ons,  chiefly  men,  and  the 
most  industrious  inhabitants,  nearly  a  fourth  of  the  whole 
population,  passed  over  to  the  neighbouring  colony  ;   and 
those  who  remained  suffered  heavily  by  their  absence. 

That  depression,  however,  was  only  temporary ;  and 
though  the  gold  discoveries  destroyed  the  hope  which  had 
been  entertained  that  South  Australia  would  attain  supre- 
macy among  the  trans-Indian  colonies,  it  really  profited 
immensely  by  them.  Scanty  supplies  of  gold  were  also 
found  within  its  limits,  and  many  of  the  old  settlers  now 
came  back,  recruited  by  many  fresh  arrivals,  to  seek  for  the 
glittering  treasure.  Therein  they  were  not  very  successful, 
but  their  enterprise  restored  and  gave  fresh  life  to  the 
flagging  trade  of  the  colony.  Great  benefit  resulted  also 
from   a  clever  expedient  resorted  to  by  the  colonists  and 

Forster,  p.  62. 


lii 


EFFECTS  OF  THE  GOLD  DISCOVERIES. 


263 


il^ 


make  it 
3S,  richer 
had  only 
ce.     Jiut 
1  in  tliat 
have  pro- 
rt  PhilUp 
'ted  to  its 
the  props 
be  streets 
\  by  their 
irketable. 
mg  wares 
business ; 
ise  in  the 
tie  bill  en- 
r  probably 
ny  of  the 
,,  they  im- 
n  seekinjf 
Within 
1,  and  tliG 
the  whole 
ony ;   and 
nee. 

•ary ;    and 
which  had 
Lxin  supre- 
y  profited 
were  also 
ttlers  now 
ek  for  tlio 
successful, 
ife  to  the 
ulted  also 
Duists  and 


their  new  governor,  Sir  Henry  Young.  Judging  that  the 
next  best  thing  to  finding  gold  in  their  own  territory  wag 
the  bringing  into  it  of  the  gold  found  elsewhere,  they  resolved 
to  accept  uncoined  gold  as  currency.  Offering  for  it  a  price 
higher  than  the  diggers  and  their  agents  could  be  sure  to 
obtain  if  they  sent  it  all  the  way  to  Europe,  though  less  by 
about  a  shilling  in  the  pound  than  it  was  worth  a'ccoi-ding 
to  the  English  standard,  they  induced  the  importation  of 
vast  quantities  of  it.  Between  February,  1852,  when  the 
plan  was  adopted,  and  the  following  December,  the  gold 
thus  brought  into  Adelaide  and  converted  into  stamped 
ingots  was  worth  £1,395,208,  and  the  supply  was  not 
diminished  in  the  ensuing  months.  Much  of  this  gold  was 
hoarded  and  eventually  taken  to  other  markets,  there  to  bo 
sold  at  its  full  value,  and  thus  to  realize  a  considerable 
profit  to  the  dealers  ;  but  much  of  it,  as  much  as  there  was 
room  for,  circulated  freely  in  the  colony,  and  gave  a  great 
stimulus  to  trade. 

For  the  wheat  and  other  produce  of  South  Australia,  also, 
there  was  a  greatly  increased  demand  in  consequence  of 
the  rapid  increase  of  population  in  the  gold  districts.     Thus 
the  colony  reaped  a  large    share  of    the  wealth  of  the 
Australian  El  Dorado.     '  The  population  returned  to  resume 
their  ordinary  employments,'  says  the  historian  ;  '  the  large 
amount  of  money  put  into  circulation  restored  property  to 
its  former  value ;  and  the  colony  commenced  a  new  era  of 
prosperity.     It  was  pleasant   to  contemplate  the  marked 
improvement  which  had  taken  place  in  the  circumstances 
of  the  community.     The  wives  and  families   of   returned 
diggers,  many  of   whom  had  been  left  behind  with  very 
slendei'  means  when  their  husbands  and  parents  set  oti'  for 
Victoria,  were  now  enabled  to  exhibit  themselves  in  personal 
decorations   which   gave   conclusive  evidence  of   their   in- 
creased resources.     An  extensive  patronage  was  bestowed 
upon  the  drapers  and  jewellers  of  Adelaide,  but  not  suc!i 
as  to  interfere  materially  with  the  reproductive  employment 
of  the  newly-acquired   wealth.      Farms  which  had  been 


.;  !. 


H  i 


'I' 


i  ! 


:  )- 


i  ■ 


i 


€    Uli 


Jill 


„ri 


K 

•I      Hi. 


'64 


SOUTH  AUSTRALIA. 


taken  with  right  of  purchase  were  speedily  secured  in  fee- 
simple  ;  houses  and  stores  were  erected  in  town  and  country ; 
industrir,!  operations  were  entered  upon  with  renewed  life 
and  vigour,  and  that  which  was  at  first  looked  upon  as  a 
dire  calamity  turned  out  to  be  an  extensive  and  unmitigated 
blessing.'* 

Since  then  the  career  of  South  Australia  has  generally 
been  one  of  rapid  development.     Sir  Henry  Young,  who, 
after  a  short  interval,  succeeded  Sir  George  Grey,  and  was 
governor  from  1848  to  1854,  did  much  useful  service  to  the 
colony,  and  after  him  it  had  a  really  able  ruler,  between 
1853  and  1862,  in   Sir  Kichard  Macdonell.     *  During   his 
term  of  office  responsible  government  was  inaugurated,  and 
the  political    changes   were    introduced   which   materially 
altered  the  position  of  Her  Majesty's  representative.     Sir 
Eichard  readily  adapted  himself  to  the  new  state  of  affairs, 
and  settled  down  as  a  constitutional  governor,  directed  by 
the  wishes  of   his  ministerial   advisers.     He   was   full  of 
physical  and  mental  energy,  in  the  prime  of  life,  almost  a 
giant  in   stature,  and   with   a  well-cultivated   mind.     He 
visited  all  parts  of  the  colony,  and  made  himself  personally 
acquainted  with  the  wants  and  capabilities  of  nearly  every 
district ;    and  being  capable  of  enduring  great  fatigue,  ho 
made  lengthened  journeys  into  the  distant  bush,  so  as  to 
earn  for  himself  almost  the  character  of  an  explorer,  'f    Both 
by  him    and  by  his  predecessor  great  care  was  taken   in 
opening  up  roads  to  districts  previously  neglected,  and  in 
improving  the   communications   between   stations  already 
occupied,  whereby  they  were  made  more  serviceable  to  one 
another,  and  to  the  colony  at  large.     Eailways  and  tele- 
graphic lines  began  to  be  estabhshed  between  the  principal 
towns.     Those  towns  were  aided  by  many  new  institutions. 
The  navigation  of  the  two  groat  rivers,  the  Murray  and  the 
Darling,  was  improved,  and  the  coast  was  provided  with 
lighthouses.     In  1856  the  colony  received  a  new  constitution , 


*  Forstcr,  pp.  (S<q,  <oJ.  f  Ibid.,  pp. 


^<.  . 


A  PROSPEROUS  COLONY. 


:6s 


jd  in  fee- 
country  ; 
ewed  life 
ipon  as  a 
nitigated 

generally 
mg,  who, 
and  was 
ice  to  the 
between 
[iring   his 
ated,  and 
naterially 
tive.     Sir 
of  affairs, 
rected  by 
IS   full  of 
almost  a 
ind.     He 
lersonally 
irly  every 
itigue,  ho 
so  as  to 
|.'t    Both 
taken   in 
|d,  and  in 
already 
lie  to  one 
,nd  tele- 
Iprincipal 
itutions. 
and  the 
ed  with 
ititution, 


by  which  the  old  Legislative  Council  was  reorganized,  and 
a  new  House  of  Ascenibly,  elected  by  universal  suffrage, 
was  added  to  it ;  and  the  inliabitanbs,  thus  endowed  with 
idll  rights  of  self-government,  made,  in  the  main,  good  use 
of  their  powers. 

By  these  means  the  colony  was  enabled  to  advance 
steadily  in  all  ways  of  social,  commercial,  and  agricultural 
improvement.  The  mineral  wealth  of  the  country  was 
greatly  developed.  Besides  the  older  mines,  the  chief  b(dng 
that  at  Burra  Burra,  many  new  ones  were  opened.  The 
Wallaroo  field,  or  Yorke's  Peninsula,  discovered  by  Captain 
Hughes  in  1860,  and  the  Moonta  mine,  in  the  same  strip  of 
land,  opened  in  the  following  year,  proved  both  richer  and 
more  extensive  than  Burra  Burra.  '  The  place,'  it  was  said 
of  this  district,  '  is  not,  to  the  eye  of  a  novice,  a  very  likely 
one  for  mines.  It  is  a  vast  expanse  of  flat,  scrubby  country, 
interspersed  with  open  plains,  covered  with  a  dry  and  scanty 
herbage.  Underneath  is  an  unbroken  crust  of  limestone, 
extending  over  the  entire  area  of  the  peninsula,  and  the 
whole  seems  as  if  it  had,  at  a  very  recent  geological  period, 
emerged  from  the  sea.  Not  a  rock  is  to  be  seen  anywhere, 
nor  a  hill,  to  break  the  even  surface  of  the  ground,  nor  a 
gully,  nor  a  water-course  of  any  description,  for  miles  and 
miles.  The  scrubs  are  full  of  burrowing  animals,  and  large 
holes  are  met  with  at  every  two  or  three  hundred  yards. 
These  are  said  to  be  wombat  holes,  but  they  are  more  fre- 
quently occupied  by  the  wallaby,  a  sort  of  miniature  kangaroo, 
upon  which  tlie  natives  feed  extensively.  In  the  operation 
of  scratching  their  holes,  the  animals  throw  up  minute 
specimens  of  the  rocks  beneath,  and  amongst  these  particles 
was  one  day  thrown  up  a  small  green  stone,  about  the 
size  of  a  pea,  which  on  examination  proved  to  be  green 
carbonate  of  copper.  The  natural  reflection  that  there 
was  more  where  this  came  from  induced  Captain  Hughes  to 
have  a  shaft  sunk  upon  the  spot,  and,  sure  enough,  at  the 
depth  of  a  few  feet,  he  came  upon  a  magnificent  lode  of  ore, 
which  has  since  been  opened  up  through  a  large  extent  of 


i»i 


11 


i  ■■  I 


266 


SOUTH  AUSTRALIA. 


t  I 


\^ 


' '.  I 


'  "  «, 


^1 


iS   ill' 


ami 

"s'S. 

••"ill 


![ii 


country,  and  is  yielding  immense  quan  *'ies  of  copper.'* 
In  nearly  every  part  of  the  district  within  a  hundred  miles 
north,  south,  east,  and  west  of  Adelaide,  copper  has  been 
found,  and  there  seems  hardly  any  limit  to  the  amount  of 
its  mineral  wealth. 

The  agricultural  and  pastoral  resources  of  the  colony  have 
proved    even    more    important.      In   1864   were   exported 
16,092,095  pounds  of  wool ;  in  1886  the  total  was  58,493,553 
pounds.     More  than  226,000  square  miles  were  occupied  as 
sheep  runs  in  1884,  and  the  value  of  the  produce  from  them 
v/as  £2,618,626,  when  also  the  value  of  the  wheat  and  other 
bread-stuffs  exported  was  £2,491,896.  To  New  South  Wales, 
Victoria,  and  its  other  neighbours  South  Australia  serves  as  a 
granary.     Other  branches  of  the  farmer's  calling,  which  have 
only  recently  begun  to  be  developed,  are  vine-gro^dng  and  other 
fruit  productions.     In  1884  the  yield  of  the  South  Australian 
vineyards  was  473,535  gallons  of  wine.    '  The  wine  produced,' 
it  was  said  in  the  early  days  of  this  new  enterprise,  *  is  of 
light  but  excellent  description,  well  suited  to  the  requirements 
of  a  warm  climate,  and  free  from  the  noxious  adulterations 
so  frequently  discovered  in  imported  wines.   It  may  be  made 
by  any  person  who  has  the  industry  to  stick  a  few  vino- 
cuttings  into  the  ground,  and  the  common  intelligence  to 
press  the  juice  from  the  grapes  when  they  have  grown  and 
ripened.     A  gentleman  was  hunting  stray  cattle  in  the  bush 
on  a  hot  day,  and  became  very  thirsty,  not  having  been  able 
to  fall  in  with  water.     Coming,  towards  evening,  across  a 
splitter's  hut,  he  called  and  asked  for  a  drink.     The  man  re- 
gretted that  he  had  no  water  in  the  house,  but  asked  him  if 
he  would  take  a  draught  of  his  wine.     The  wine  was  brou^^ht, 
and  the  gentleman  said  it  was  the  best  he  had  ever  tasted  in 
his  life.     Being  a  vine-grower  himself,  he  asked  the  man  to 
explain  to  him  the  subtle  process  by  which  he  had  been 
enabled  to  produce  so  splendid  an  article.     He  was  invited 
into  the  hut,  and  directed  to  a  large  cask  without  a  hd, 
standing  behind  the  door,  which  the  man  assured  him  was 

*  J'oi-ster,  pp.  361,  362, 


opper.  • 
ed  miles 
las  been 
nount  of 

Dny  have 
exported 
3,493,553 
cupied  as 
:om  them 
and  other 
th  Wales, 
erves  as  a 
■hich  have 
rand  other 
Australian 
produced,' 
ise,  '  is  of 
miremeuts 
[alterations 
,y  be  made 
few  vine- 
iligence  to 
Towu  and 
In  the  bush 
been  able 
across  a 
llie  man  re- 
cked him  if 
IS  brought, 
jr  tasted  in 
Ihe  man  to 
had  beeD 
^as  invited 
lOut  a  hcl, 
Id  him  wa.s 


MODERN  DEVELOPMENTS. 


267 


the  only  utensil  employed  in  the  manufacture.  "  Sir,"  he 
said,  "  all  we  did  was  to  put  the  grapes  into  that  'ere  cask, 
and  never  trouble  ourselves  about  them  no  more  ;  and  when 
we  pulled  out  the  spigot,  out  comes  the  v.ine  you  have  just 
been  drinking  of !"  The  tub  had  been  filled  with  grapes,  from 
which  the  juice  had  escaped  as  they  became  heated  and 
broken,  and  the  process  of  fermentation  had  thrown  the  scum 
to  the  top,  forming  a  hard  air-tight  crust,  which  had  herme- 
tically sealed  the  vessel,  and  prevented  the  liquor  from  be- 
coming sour.'* 

All  residents  in  South  Australia  are  not  so  fortunate  as  that 
splitter,  but  the  colony's  good  soil  and  climate  make  life  easy 
to  all  who  know  how  to  employ  it ;  and  the  number  of  these 
has  been  rapidly  augmenting.     Having  risen,  as  we  have 
seen,  from  22,390  in  1845  to  63,700  in  1850,  the  population, 
exclusive  of  aborigines,  amounted  to  121,960  in  1860,  to 
213,271  in  1876,  and  to  313,355  in  1887.     Adelaide,  the  well- 
built  capital,  contains,  with  its  suburbs,  130,000  inhabitants  ; 
and  besides  Port  Adelaide,  there  are  at  least  six  other  thriving 
towns — Port   EUiott,   Port   Augusta,   Wallaroo,   Kapuuda, 
Kooringa,  and  Gawler — and  upwards  of  threescore  more, 
each  of  which  promises  to  attain  importance.     '  A  remark- 
able development  of  patient  and  painstaking  industry,'  said 
a  competent  authority,  a  resident  in  Melbourne  in  1868,  '  is 
perceptible  over  the  whole  colony.     Its  resources  may  not 
bear  comparison  with  those  of  some  of  its  still  richer  neigh- 
bours ;   but,  whatever  those  resources   may   be,  they  are 
certainly  in   course  of  development  in  a  very   intelligent 
manner.     It  is  England  in  miniature,  England  without  its 
poverty,   without    its   monstrous   anomalies   of    individual 
extravagances  thrown  into  unnecessary  and  indecent  relief 
by  abounding   destitution.     It   is    England,   with   a    finer 
climate,  with  a  virgin  soil,  with  freedom  from  antiquated 
abuses,' with  more  liberal  institutions,  with  a  happier  people.' 
Those   remarks   apply  chiefly  to   the  portions  of  South 
Australia,  as  it  was  originally  defined,  which  have  been 

*  Forster,  pp.  109,  110. 


t 

t  ■ 

i 
1 

! 

M 


^\•x; 


268 


SOUTH  AUSTRALIA. 


\ 


i;     I 


jii 


more  or  less  occupied  and  cultivated  since  the  commence- 
ment of  the  colony  in  1834.  The  area  thus  dealt  with 
comprises  loss  than  half  of  the  territory  then  marked  out — 
the  coast  fronting  the  Southern  Ocean  on  both  sides  of 
Adelaide,  from  the  borders  of  Victoria  to  the  west  of 
Spencer  Gulf,  and  extending  to  the  north  of  the  capital  for 
about  four  lunidred  miles.  Of  the  regions  fartlior  north,  as 
well  as  both  east  and  west,  but  little  use  has  yet  been  made. 
Abundant  enterprise  has  been  shown,  howev^ev,  bi  exploring 
this  district  and  the  adjacent  regions,  and,  as  will  be  men- 
tioned in  a  later  chapter,  nuich  of  the  zeal  shown  since  tlio 
days  of  early  adventures  from  Sydney  in  visiting  the 
Australian  interior  has  emanated  from  Adelaide.  Edward 
John  Eyre  did  much  in  1840  and  1841,  and  more  was  done 
by  John  McDouall  Stuart  and  others  between  18.00  and 
18G2.  In  the  latter  year  Stuart  traversed  the  whole  conti- 
nent from  south  to  north,  reaching  Van  Diemen's  Gulf  in 
the  Indian  Ocean.  It  was  in  acknowledgment  of  the  zeni 
then  shown  by  the  South  Australians,  and  in  reasonable 
expectation  that  they  would  persevere  in  their  researches 
for  the  public  good,  that  in  18G3  they  were  allowed  tu 
consider  this  northern  coast  and  all  the  intermediate  sweep 
of  plain  and  desert  as  portions  of  their  colony.  The  name 
of  South  Australia  is  now  inappropriate,  as  it  includes  some 
of  the  most  northern  as  well  as  southern  parts  of  the  iHland. 
Its  area  has  thus  been  increased  from  about  300,000  to  about 
900,000  square  miles. 

This  northern  territory,  with  a  good  sea-board,  well 
watered,  and  available  for  pasturage  if  not  for  agricultural 
and  other  occupations,  may  hereafter  be  devolojind  into 
another  and  an  important  colony.  Almost  the  only  use 
hitherto  made  of  it,  however,  has  been  in  the  jDoliMfcrUction 
of  a  telegraph  station  at  Fort  Darwin,  whieb  \%  connectetl 
along  a  line  of  1,973  miles  with  x\delaide,  from  wlljnll  Nlll/ 
marine  communication  is  extended  to  Europe.  This  Im- 
portant undertaking  was  commenced  in  August,  1870,  ami 
completed  in  August,  1872,  at  a  cost  of  £370,000.     '  In  one 


nmence- 
alt  with 
id  out — 
sides  of 
west    of 
pital  for 
north,  as 
311  made, 
ixplorhig 
he  mett- 
unce  tlie 
iting   the 
Edward 
vas  done 
IHfjO  iiiifl 
)lo  conti- 
3  Gulf  in 
:  the  'ieii\ 
casouahlo 
Bsearches 
lowed   jiO 
0  Rwno]i 
le  iialuu 

dofl  HOUIQ 

le  iHhiud. 
)  to  ahout 

ird,  well 
ricultnral 
jinrl  into 
ouly  U8U 

itl'lHiiJoll 

ouuected 

il<t||  Mllll 

This  hii 

L870,  iuid 

« In  one 


T//E  NORTHERN  TERRITORY. 


269 


year  and  eleven  months,'  wo  are  told,  '  36,000  telej^raph 
poles,  wcighinj^  5,000  tons,  liad  to  he  cut,  prepared,  and 
carted  for  an  average  distance  of  from  eight  to  ten  miles, 
tlie  maximum  being  300  miles.  Iron  poles,  imported  from 
England,  had  to  be  conveyed  an  average  distance  of  400 
miles.  In  addition  to  this,  2,000  tons  of  material  Jiad  to  bo 
carted,  and  several  thousand  cattle  and  sheep  driven  into 
the  interior,  for  distances  ranging  up  to  1,300  miles.  TMore- 
over,  tracks  fifty  feet  wide  had  to  be  cut  and  cleared 
through  some  500  miles  of  forest  and  scrub.  Building 
materials,  batteries,  and  other  stores  had  to  be  carried  for 
the  use  of  stations,  and  nine  substantial  stations  had  to  be 
erected  and  equipped. '■**■ 

*  'Australian  Handbook  for  1886,'  p.  397. 


w\ 


r,  i 

inji 


1 


i'  \ 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 


VICTOllIA. 


''i 


1 1 


.1 


THE  KSTA'UUSHMENT  OF  PORT  PHILLIP  AS  AN  INDEPENDENT  COLONY  UNDER 
THE  NAME  OV  VICTORIA — THE  AUSTRALIAN  GOLD  DISCOVKUIKS — THE 
BALLARAT  OOLD-FIKLDS — THE  CONSEQUENCES  OF  THE  DISCOVKUY — THE 
PRO(iHESS  OF  VICTORIA — MELHOURNK  IN  1856 — THE  HALLAHAT  OUTBREAK 
— POLITICAL  CHANliKd   IN   VICTORIA — ITS    LATER   HISTORY.      [1851-1888.] 

HE  Port  Phillip  Settlement  was  uot  five  years  old 
when  its  inhabitants  began  to  call  for  separation 
from  New  South  Wales,  and  for  establishment 
as   a  distinct  colony,  with  equal  privileges   to 
those  conferred  upon  Van  Diemen's  Land  in  the 
south,  and  South  Australia  in  the  west.     A  partial  answer 
to  their  demand  was  made  by  the  political  reform  of  1842, 
which  gave  a  larger  area  and  local  institutions  to  the  dis- 
trict, and  allowed  it  to  send  six  delegates  of  its  own  to  the 
Legislative  Council  in   Sydney.     But  the  people  of  Mel- 
bourne and  its  neighbourhood  found  that  Sydney  was  so  far 
off  from  their  own  centres  of  enterprise  that  their  leading 
men  refused  to  go  thither  for  political  work,  and  they  soon 
insisted  more  loudly  than  ever  on  their  right  to  such  parlia- 
mentary privileges  as   could  be   exercised  by  and  among 
themselves.     During  several  years  there  was  a  hard-fought 
struggle  for  secession,  waged  not  only  in  Australia,  but  also 
in  England.     In  the  end  the  separatists  succeeded.     The 
division  was  authorized  by  the  Australian  Colonies  Act  of 
1850 ;  and  on  the  1st  of  July,  1851,  the  District  of  Port 


1 1. 


EARL  V  COLD  FINDINGS  IN  A  US  TR  A  LI  A.       271 

riiillip,  now  iiaiiicd  Victoria,  in  accordaiico  with  tho  express 
wibh  of  the  good  Queen  herself,  becan^.o  an  independent 
colony. 

That  pohtical  change  was  contemporary  with  a  dis- 
covery destined  to  effect  a  mighty  revolution  in  tlio  social 
and  commercial  condition  both  of  New  South  Wa^es  and 
of  Victoria. 

Stray  hints  of  tho  existence  of  gold  in  Australia  had  been 
given  long  before  any  use  was  made  of  *hem.  As  early  as 
183G  a  Sydney  convict  produced  a  lump  of  the  precious 
metal,  which  he  declared  that  ho  had  found  in  the  interior ; 
but  as  he  failed  to  point  out  tho  precise  spot  from  which  he 
had  obtained  it,  it  was  assumed  that  he  had  stolen  a  watch 
and  melted  it  down,  and  ho  was  punished  with  a  hundred 
and  fifty  lashes.  A  Scotch  shepherd  also  brought  several 
pieces  of  ^old  into  Sydney,  but  he  kept  its  source  secret, 
and  was  accordingly  only  suspected  of  some  dishonesty.  In 
1839  Count  Strzelecki,  an  emini.nt  naturalist  and  dis- 
coverer, found  some  gold  in  tho  Australian  Alps,  and  gave 
reasons  for  supposing  that  it  abouiK^od  in  that  district. 
But,  he  said,  *  I  was  warned  of  the  responsibility  I  should 
incur  if  I  gave  publicity  to  the  discovery,  since,  as  tho 
Governor  argued,  by  proclaiming  the  colonies  to  be  gold 
regions,  the  maintenance  of  discipline  among  45,000  con- 
victs, which  New  South  Wales,  Tasmania,  and  Norfolk 
Island  contained,  would  become  almost  impossible,  and, 
unless  the  penal  code  should  be  amended  at  home,  trans- 
portation would  become  a  premium  upon  crime,  and  cease 
to  bo  a  punishment.  These  reasons  of  State  policy  had 
great  weight  with  me,  and  I  willingly  deferred  to  the 
reasons  of  the  Governor-General,  notwithstanding  that 
they  were  opposed  to  my  private  interests.'  Therefore 
the  secret  was  kept  for  a  dozen  years,  and  this  in  spito  of 
otlier  discoveries  and  su:mises.  In  1841,  for  instance, 
Dr.  Clarke,  a  clergyman  and  geological  student  in  Sydney, 
picked  up  some  quartz  freckled  with  gold,  and  was  con- 
vinced of  the  extensive  distribution  of  the  metal,  but  did 


rill' 

f 


W 


m 

ii 


W  f 


i 


I:'  i  \ 


I  t 


^, 


IMAGE  EVALUATION 
TEST  TARGET  (MT-3) 


T 


// 


1.0 


I.I 


11.25 


■^  1^    12.2 


IAS 


I 

us 


^m 


J. 


-    6" 


^'■^'$-^'  ^ 


Hiotographic 

Sdences 
Corporation 


23  WEST  MAIN  STREET 

WEBSTER, NY.  MS80 

(716)  872-4503 


4^ 


\ 


W 


N> 


"% 


V 


^ 


'^ 


^ 


'9. 


I 


6^ 


k 


272 


VICTORIA. 


S  1    • 

I 

i 

* 

i! 


\\ 


•  a  i- 


•M     "It 

.  «  » 


fit 

tc  ■ 


i 


3 


not  take  the  trouble  to  carry  out  his  speculation  ;  and  in 
1844,  though  Sir  Roderick  Murchison  urged,  on  purely 
scientiGc  grounds,  \X\:  probable  existence  of  gold-fields 
among  the  mountains  south  of  Sydney,  no  use  was  made  of 
liis  hypothesis. 

At  length,  in  February,  1851,  Mr.  E.  H.  Hargreaves,  a 
practical  miner,  who  had  lately  come  from  California,  and 
who  was  struck  by  the  resemblance  of  some  Australian 
districts  to  the  great  American  gold-country,  began  to  make 
experiments.  In  May  he  announced  their  successful  issue, 
and  immediately  there  was  a  rush  of  adventurers  to  Suni- 
merhill,  in  Bathurst,  the  site  pointed  out  by  hnn.  Unlike 
Count  Strzelecki,  to  whom  the  honour  of  the  first  discovery 
is  due,  he  was  rewarded,  not  only  by  his  share  in  the  first 
proceeds  of  the  gold-field,  but  by  a  grant  of  £10,000  from  the 
Sydney  Government. 

In  that  way  the  El  Dorado  of  New  South  Wales  was 
opened  up,  soon  to  be  surpassed  by  the  El  Dorado  of 
Victoria.  In  that  colony,  too,  there  had  been  C2casional 
findings  of  golden  lumps  in  previous  years  ;  but  no  heed  was 
taken  of  them  until  the  discovery  of  the  Bathurst  gold-fields. 
Then  some  Melbourne  citizens  offered  a  reward  of  £200  to 
anyone  who  would  find  an  available  gold-field  within  the 
limits  of  Victoria,  and  '  prospecting  '  became  an  active  pur- 
suit. It  succeeded ;  and  all  previous  discoveries  v.ere 
eclipsed  by  those  made  at  Ballarat,  a  hundred  miles  to  the 
north-west  of  Melbourne,  on  the  8th  of  September  in  the 
same  year,  1851,  and  soon  afterwards  in  other  parts  of  the 
colony. 

Thereupon  ensued  a  turmoil,  unparalleled  even  in  the 
history  of  California.  '  Ere  the  first  month  expired,'  says 
the  historian,  '  nearly  10,000  diggers,  of  all  classes  of  society, 
who  had  rushed  promiscuously  to  the  attractive  scene,  were 
upon  and  around  the  famous  Golden  Point,  the  original 
nucleus  of  Ballarat  mining.  But  hardly  was  this  miscel- 
laneous crowd  settled  at  work  ere  it  commenced  shelving  off 
to  Mount  Alexander,  which  rumour  proclaimed  to  be  a 


\' 


!     I  ."I 


A  NEW  EL  DORADO. 


-/ j 


and  in 

purely 
la-fielcls 
made  o£ 

eaves,  a 
■nia,  and 
astralian 

to  make 

•ul  issue, 

to  Smn- 

XJnlikc 

discovery 

the  first 
)  from  the 

Vales  was 
;)orado  of 
occasional 
heed  was 
rold-fields. 
of  £200  to 
,vithin  the 
ictive  pur- 
2ries   were 
liles  to  the 
ber  in  the 
arts  of  the 

rcn  in  the 
Dired,'  says 
i  of  society, 
icene,  were 
he  original 
his  miscel- 
shelving  off 
id  to  be  a 


still  richer  gold-field.  In  October  and  November,  Mount 
Alexander  lived  in  a  blaze  of  predominant  fame  ;  but  it  was 
in  turn  dimmed  by  the  superior  lustre  of  Bendigo,  which 
made  good  its  pre-eminence  during  several  subsequent 
years.  Bendigo  was,  indeed,  a  wonder  of  its  day,  and  the 
extent  and  activity  of  the  industrial  field  it  presented  at  this 
early  time  have  hardly  since  been  exceeded  in  the  c61ony. 
In  the  middle  of  1852,  the  winter-time  of  the  antipodes, 
there  were  reported,  no  doubt  with  some  exaggeration,  to 
be  50,000  diggers  along  the  Bendigo  Creek.  The  great  and 
sudden  demand  for  food  and  other  necessaries  was  met  with 
difficulty,  under  the  double  drawback  of  the  state  of  the 
roads  and  the  state  of  the  labour  market.  Prices  rose  in 
due  proportion,  until  the  price  at  length  secured  the  supply. 
Two  thousand  carts  and  drays,  and  other  vehicles,  were 


said  to  be  simultaneously  toiling 


along 


the  roads  to  the 


different  gold-fields.  Bendigo  was  one  hundred  miles  distant 
from  Melbourne,  and  £1  per  ton  per  mile  and  upwards  wore 
the  rates  of  carriage  of  the  day.  The  local  dealer  must  have 
his  profit  as  well  as  the  carrior  ;  so  that  a  ton  of  flour,  which 
cost  £25  at  Melbourne,  had  risen  to  £200  before  it  reached 
the  hungry  consumer  at  Bendigo.'* 

The  profits  made  by  the  gcld-diggers  themselves,  indeed, 
were  generally  far  surpassed  by  the  profits  of  those  who 
catered  for  their  wants.  *  When  I  visited  England  in  1848,' 
we  are  told,  '  a  steerage  passenger  and  his  wife  were  in  the 
ship,  the  whole  of  whose  property,  when  we  landed  at  the 
London  Docks,  I  believe  could  have  been  purchased  for  £10 
This  man  was  a  lollipop  maker.  A  few  years  after  the  gold 
discovery  I  met  him  in  Sydney,  when  he  told  me  he  was 
going  back  to  England  in  the  next  ship.  Struck  at  seeing 
such  an  improved  edition  of  my  former  shipmate,  I  remarked 
to  him,  "  You  seem  to  have  been  doing  well  since  we  last 
met?"  "Oh  yes,  sir,"  he  rephed,  "remarkably  well.  I 
have  been  for  the  last  three  years  near  Melbourne."  "Then," 
I  said,  "  you  seem  to  have  had  good  luck  at  the  diggings." 
*  Westgarth,  '  VJctoria,'  pp.  126,  127. 

18 


'I' 


'I 


274 


VICTORIA. 


\ ' 


lit! 


•  S  * 
'3 


His  answer  was,  "  I  did  not  go  near  them."  "  What,  then, 
did  you  do  ?"  was  my  next  natural  question.  "  Well,  sir,  I 
kept  a  public-house  for  the  last  three  ynars.  I  took  a  good 
stand  on  the  high  road  to  the  Ballarat  diggings,  and  had 
little  trouble  in  turning  in  £G,000  a  year ;  and  I  am  now 
going  home  with  £20,000,  besides  leaving  behind  me  a  free- 
hold property  of  £1,500  a  year  in  Melbourne."  '* 

There  was  plenty  of  money-making  of  that  sort ;  and  if 
some  adventurers  put  to  good  use  their  easily  acquired 
wealth,  more  squandered  it  in  riotous  ways,  which  helped  to 
increase  the  confusion  and  disorganization  of  society  that 
the  gold-discoveries  provoked.  Men  of  all  tempers  and  all 
grades  of  character  rushed  to  the  gold-fields,  first  from  the 
older  districts  of  Victoria  and  the  neighbouring  colonies — 
not  a  few  being  escaped  convicts  and  tickei-of-leave  men 
from  Tasmania — and  afterwards  from  Europe,  Asia,  Africa, 
and  America ;  and,  many  of  them  being  reckless  and  lawless 
in  their  dispositions,  the  influence  which  they  exerted  upon 
the  colony  was  often  altogether  baneful.  An  intoxication  of 
success  prevailed  everywhere,  save  when,  in  the  case  of 
multitudes  who  failed  in  winning  the  wealth  they  sought, 
and  in  the  case  of  others  who  became  suddenly  rich  only  to 
squander  their  money  and  become  as  suddenly  poor,  it 
quickly  changed  into  an  intoxication  of  despair.  Ugly 
scenes  were  enacted  in  Melbourne,  and  all  the  adjoining 
districts  up  to  Ballarat  and  Bendigo,  which  made  quiet, 
steady-going  colonists  wish  that  this  new  source  of  wealth 
and  encouragement  to  dispipation  had  never  been  discovered. 

Yet,  with  all  its  drawbacks,  the  benefit  that  resulted  to 
Victoria  was  truly  wonderful.  It  is  not  to  be  measured  by 
the  store  of  glittering  metal  that  was  found  at  Ballarat,  and 
afterwards  in  other  parts  as  well ;  but  the  statistics  of  this 
are  sufficiently  remarkable.  In  1851  the  gold  obtained  in 
Victoria  ^vas  worth  about  £600,000,  whereas  the  yield  in 
Cahfornia  was  equal  to  £8,500,000.  In  1852  Cahfornia 
produced  £9,300,000  ;  Victoria  £10,900,000.     The  following 

*  Therry,  p.  3/1. 


^hat,then, 
Veil,  sir,  I 
Dok  a  good 
},  and  had 
I  am  now 
m^  a  frec- 

)rt ;  and  if 
y  acquired 
h  helped  to 
society  that 
Ders  and  all 
st  from  the 
;  colonies — 
f-leave  men 
Vsia,  Africa, 
and  lawless 
xerted  upon 
ioxicatiou  of 
the  case  of 
,hey  sought, 
rich  only  to 
nly  poor,  it 
pair.     Ugly 
adjoining 
made  quiet, 
of  wealth 
1  discovered, 
resulted  to 
neasured  by 
3allarat,  and 
istics  of  this 
obtained  in 
the  yield  in 
i2  CaUfornia 
'he  foUowiug 


EFFECTS  OF  THE  GOLD  DISCOVERIES. 


275 


year  was  the  richest  of  all.  The  yield  of  California  was 
£11,500,000,  that  of  Victoria  was  £12,600,000.  After  that 
the  Californian  fields  slightly  decreased  in  value,  though  for 
some  time  they  generally  yielded  between  £8,000,000  and 
£9,000,000  a  year.  Victoria  had  an  average  of  about 
£11,000,000  a  year  till  1857  ;  but  since  then  its  supply  has 
decreased  more  rapidly.  By  1860  it  had  sunk  to  the'  level 
of  California,  being  about  £8,500,000.  In  1864  it  was 
£6,200,000,  and  in  1857  £5,700,000.  In  1868,  however,  it 
rose  to  nearly  £8,000,000 ;  and  the  total  produce  of  this 
colony  during  the  eighteen  years  between  1851  and  1868 
was  about  £150,000,000,  enough  to  pay  off  a  fifth  of 
the  whole  national  debt  of  Great  Britain.  In  the  next 
eighteen  years,  from  1869  to  1886,  it  was  only  about 
£70,000,000. 

If  this  gi'eat  supply  of  gold  has  enriched  many  thousands 
of  diggers,  it  has  enriched  the  colony  at  large  still  more. 
Victoria  was  enjoying  a  prosperity  unrivalled  among  the 
dependencies  of  England  in  1851  ;  but  its  subsequent 
prosperity  has  been  vastly  greater.  In  1851  its  population 
was  77,345;  in  1854  it  had  amounted  to  236,776,  being 
more  than  trebled  in  the  three  years.  In  1857  it  was 
410,766 ;  in  1861  it  was  540,322  ;  in  1865  it  was  more  than 
600,000  ;  in  1871  it  exceeded  731,000  ;  in  1881  it  was 
nearly  850,000  ;  and  in  1886  it  was  considerably  over 
1,000,000. 

Yet  the  resources  of  the  country  gave  ample  employment 
to  nearly  all  the  new-comers  who  were  capable  of  making 
good  use  of  them.  Manufactures  of  all  sorts  prospered  in 
the  towns,  and  agricultural  pursuits  offered  easy  facilities 
for  advancement  in  che  country  districts,  though  in  them 
Victoria  was  in  most  respects  surpassed  by  South  Australia ; 
while  in  the  more  remote  parts  squatters  carried  on  their 
profitable  calling,  and  furnished  what  was,  after  gold,  the 
staple  export  of  the  colony.  Victoria  exported  18,091,207 
pounds  of  wool  in  1850,  25,579,886  pounds  in  1863,  and 
42,391,234  pounds  in  1866,  the  value  of  the  latter  being 

18-2 


i! 


;i  !J 


f' 


i\ 


76 


VICTORIA. 


\\ 


! 


•  > 

;  » 

:  1 

•  s 

.''3 


I'        ' 


.C3, 190,491 ;  and  that  rate  of  iucrcase  has  since  been  about 
maintained.  The  exports  of  wool  in  1884  amounted  in 
quantity  to  119,502,240  pounds,  and  in  value  to  £0,342,877 ; 
all  the  other  exports  in  the  same  year  being  estimated  at 
upwards  of  £10,000,000  more. 

Some  account  of  Melbourne,  in  illustration  of  the  early 
progress  of  the  colony,  has  been  already  given.  '  A  more 
striking  contrast,'  says  one  writer,  '  could  not  well  be 
furnished  than  the  appearance  Melbourne  presented  when 
I  was  there  in  the  year  1845,  and  afterwards  when  I  visited 
it  in  1850.  In  1845  Bourke  Street  contained  but  a  few- 
scattered  cottages,  and  sheep  w^ere  grazed  on  the  thick 
grass  then  growing  in  the  street.  It  was  only  known  to 
be  a  street  in  that  year  by  a  sign  indicating,  "  This  is 
Bourke  Street."  In  1850  it  was  as  crowded  with  fine 
buildings,  and  as  thronged  and  alive  with  the  hurrying  to 
and  fro  of  busy  people,  as  Cheapside  at  the  present  day. 
In  1845,  from  my  residence  on  the  Eastern  Hill,  it  was  a 
pleasant  walk  through  green  paddocks  to  the  Court  House. 
Ten  years  afterwards  the  whole  way  from  that  house  to  the 
Court  House  was  filled  up  with  streets.  Two  branches  of 
Sydney  banks  supplied  the  district  in  ]845  with  banking 
accommodation  that  only  occupied  them  with  business  a 
few  hours  each  day.  In  1850  eight  banks  could  scarcely 
meet  the  pecuniary  exigencies  of  the  community.  In  the 
principal  street,  Collins  Street,  there  was  in  1845  but  one 
jewellei'  who  displayed  a  scanty  supply  of  second-hand 
watches  and  pinchbeck  brooches  in  a  shop  similar  to  those 
in  which  pawnbrokers  display  their  articles  of  used-up 
jewellery  in  the  by-streets  off  the  Strand.  In  1850  might  be 
seen  in  the  same  street  jewellers'  shops  as  numerous  and 
brilliant  as  those  that  glitter  in  Kegent  Street.  The  harbour 
of  Hobson's  Bay,  on  the  morning  on  which  I  left  it  for 
Sydney,  in  1840,  contained  two  large  ships,  three  brigs, 
and  a  few  small  colonial  craft.  In  1850  the  same  harboui- 
was  filled  with  about  two  hundred  large  London  and  Liver- 
pool ships,  and  countless  other  vessels  from  America,  New 


THE  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COLONY. 


277 


)ccn  about 
ouiited  ill 
0,342,877 ; 
bimatcd  at 

;  the  early 
'  A  more 
)t   well  b(j 
Jilted  when 
3n  I  visited 
but  a  few 
the  thick 
r  known  to 
;,  "  This  is 
I  with  fine 
hurrying  to 
iresent  day. 
[ill,  it  was  a 
curt  House. 
lOUse  to  the 
branches  of 
ith  banking 
business  a 
aid  scarcely 
ty.     In  the 
345  but  one 
iccond-hand 
ilar  to  those 
of   used-up 
56  might  be 
_merous  and 
Che  harbour 
I  left  it  for 
three  brigs, 
,me  harbour 
and  Liver- 
nerica,  New 


Zealand,  and  other  parts.  In  1845  there  was  little  more 
than  one  clergyman  of  each  religious  denomination.  \\\ 
185(3  a  numerous  clergy  of  t!ic  various  denoiiiMiations 
olliciat*.>d;  the  two  principal,  Church  of  Englaml  and  Roman 
Catholic,  presided  over  by  bishops  of  their  respective  creeds. 
In  short,  in  size,  in  wealth,  in  numbers,  in  varied  social 
enjoyments,  the  humble  town  I  had  quitted  in  1845  Tiad 
been  transformed  in  1856  into  a  splendid  city,  and  presented 
such  a  transition  from  poverty  to  splendour  as  no  city  in 
the  ancient  or  modern  world  had  heretofore  exhibited  in  a 
corresponding  period.'*  In  1856,  however,  Melbourne  had 
not  90,000  inhabitants  ;  in  1887  there  were  about  400,000, 
considerably  more  than  the  entire  colony  of  South  Australia 
then  contained.  Other  thriving  towns  also  exist  in  Victoria, 
which  in  rapidity  of  growth  keep  pace  with  Melbourne. 
Geelong,  its  earliest  rival,  has  fallen  behind-hand ;  but 
others,  like  Ballarat  and  Sandhurst,  which  owe  their  im- 
portance to  the  gold-discovery,  are  now  markets  for  nmch 
besides  gold. 

Of  the  general  history  of  the  colony  only  a  few  incidents 
need  to  be  recorded.  By  the  constitution  which  it  received 
with  its  independence,  the  management  of  affairs,  under  the 
governor,  was  vested  in  a  Legislative  Council  of  thirty 
members,  ten  being  Crown  nominees,  and  the  other  twenty 
elected  by  all  inhabitants  who  paid  a  £10  annual  rental. 
Mr.  Latrobe,  who  had  been  made  superintendent  of  the 
province  in  1839,  continued  in  ofTice  as  governor  of  the 
separate  colony  till  May,  1854  ;  but  his  quiet  rule  hardly 
gave  satisfaction  to  the  restless  colonists.  Still  less  were 
they  satisfied  with  his  successor.  Sir  Charles  Hotham,  who 
shared  the  blame  thrown  upon  his  predecessor  for  the  dis- 
turbance that  broke  out  at  Ballarat  in  the  following 
November. 

'  The  gold-fields  by  this  time,'  sayc  the  historian,  '  com- 
prised by  far  the  most  important  interest  in  the  colony, 
more  than  half  of  the  population   being  connected  with 

*  Therry,  pp.  355-357. 


!      .'! 


278 


VICTORIA. 


||i;l 


IHI 


jjjii 


■ » l» 

:  ^^ 
;  a  I* 

■  2  ^ 


•5  J 


I  - 


.3i 


1 

'-'3 
it 


them.  A  growl  of  complaint  from  this  miscellaneous  mass 
of  people  had  from  the  first  scarcely  ever  ceased  to  be 
emitted  ;  and  this  ominous  noise  had  been  gradually  in- 
creasing in  loudness  and  sharpness  under  an  accmnulating 
variety  of  evils.  Some  of  these  evils,  so  far  at  least  as  the 
authorities  were  concerned,  were  irremediable,  such  as  the 
discomfort  of  digging  life,  and  the  prccariousness  of  its  re- 
sults ;  both  of  these  adverse  features  having  been  aggravated 
by  the  circumstance  of  a  scanty  rainfall  in  tlie  year  1854, 
when  the  yield  of  gold  was  in  consequence  unusually  small. 
Other  evils  seemed  to  admit  of  remedy,  and  the  Colonial 
Government  received  plentiful  blame  at  the  hands  of  the 
diggings  community  in  regard  to  them.  There  was,  indeed, 
much  substantial  ground  for  these  complaints.  A  vast 
irregular  society  had  been  suddenly  called  up  throughout 
the  colony,  and  the  Government,  somewhat  perplexed  how 
to  deal  v/ith  it,  had  been  fain  to  let  the  difliculty  solve  itself 
by  doing  nothing;  that  is  to  say,  although  they  had  ap- 
pointed paid  officers  and  paid  magistrates,  who  went 
through  a  round  of  duties — and  with  especial  strictness 
that  of  collecting  the  gold-mining  license  fee  of  thirty 
shillings  monthly,  as  well  as  the  other  Government  dues— 
they  had  never  taken  any  steps  to  make  the  gold-fields 
population,  socially  and  politically,  a  part  of  the  colony. 
There  was  no  arrangement  for  a  mining  franchise  and  a 
gold-fields  representation,  and  no  social  status,  even  by 
the  simple  and  usual  expedient  of  graduating  the  people  to 
the  Government  by  enrolling  the  more  respectable  of  the 
great  mining  community  as  local  justices  of  the  peace. 
This  state  of  things  had  lasted  three  years,  and  it  was 
greatly  aggravated  by  the  vain  efforts  of  ihe  colonists  to 
induce  the  hesitating  Government  to  sell  adequate  quantities 
of  the  public  lands.  Many  a  digger  longed  for  a  few  adjacent 
acres,  on  which  he  might  rear  a  home  and  plant  a  garden 
or  potato-field  of  his  own ;  and  for  such  a  rare  luxury  he 
would  willingly  have  exchanged  the  tin  pannikin  or  pickle- 
bottle  full  of  gold  that  lay  concealed  iu  a  corner  of  his  tent, 


rma 


THE  BALLARAT  OUTBREAK. 


79 


eouB  mass 
,sed  to  Le 
dually  in- 
.lunulatini^ 
3ast  as  tlio 
uch  as  the 
s  of  its  re- 
aggravated 
year  1851, 
lally  small, 
[le  Colonial 
mds  of  the 
vas,  indeed, 
s.     A  vast 
throughout 
plexed  how 
^  solve  itself 
ley  had  ap- 
who  went 
il  strictness 
e  of  thirty 
nent  dues— 
3  gold-fields 
the  colony, 
chise  and  a 
us,  even  by 
,he  people  to 
;table  of  the 
the  peace, 
and  it  was 
colonists  to 
ite  quantities 
few  adjacent 
ant  a  garden 
■e  luxury  he 
vin  or  pickle- 
x  of  his  tent, 


and  represented  the  last  six  months  of  his  mining  toils. 
Discontent  centred  itself  in  the  question  of  the  monthly 
license  fee,  as  this  was  a  subject  on  which  a  demonstration 
could  be  most  effectually  made.    The  Government  had  tried 
some  palliatives  in  the  license  difliculty;  and,  by  allowing 
a  discount  on  prepayments  for  longer  terms  than  a  month, 
had  hoped  to  supersede  many  of  the  collectors'  visits,  and 
BO  diminish  the  occasions  for  hostile  manifestations.    These 
efforts  had  not  been  successful.     The  Ballarat  riot  took  its 
more  immediate  rise  from  one  of  the  '  raids '  upon   the 
diggers  for  the  obnoxious  license  money.     Upon  the  first 
serious  threatenings  of  disturbance,  however,   a  party  of 
military  were  sent  up  from  Melbourne,  who,  on  arrival, 
were  confronted  by  a  stockade  erected  by  the  rioters  on 
the  famous  Bakery  Hill.     At  early  dawn  of  the  3rd   of 
December,  this  place  was  stormed  and  taken,  not  without 
loss  of  life  on  both  sides;  and  thus  this  very  exceptional 
and  unhappy  colonial  occurrence  came  to  an  end.'* 

The  cause  of  offence  also  soon  came  to  an  end.  In  1855 
the  political  condition  of  the  gold-diggers  was  entirely  re- 
constituted. The  monthly  license  fee  was  abolished,  and, 
iu  lieu,  a  small  export  duty  on  gold  was  appointed,  while 
the  diggers  were  enabled,  on  payment  of  £1  a  year,  to 
secure  for  themselves  both  mining  privileges  and  the  fran- 
chise. The  gold-fields  were  divided  into  districts,  each 
under  the  charge  of  a  warder,  who  saw  that  the  local  courts 
did  their  duty,  and  was  aided  by  a  staff  of  unpaid  justices. 
These  arrangements  gave  satisfaction  to  the  mining  com- 
munity, and  helped  to  convert  a  discontented  and  lawless 
race  of  men  into  good  citizens  and  friends  of  order. 

The  reforms  were  part  of  a  change  which  was  effected 
in  the  management  of  the  whole  colony.  The  people,  both 
of  Victoria  and  of  the  neighbouring  settlements,  were  not 
satisfied  with  the  pohtical  arrangements  that  had  been  made 
for  them  in  1851.  They  asked  for  fuller  representative 
rights  and  greater  power  of  self-government ,  in  fact,  for  a 

*  Westgarth,  pp.  148-150. 


J^ 


I'A^m 


'^m^ 


28o 


VICTORIA. 


completo  lomocratlc  system.  '  Tho  Ballot,  No  Property 
Qualification,  Equal  Electoral  Districts,  and  Maiiliood 
Suffrage,'  were  the  four  '  points  of  tho  charter*  claimed  by 
tho  Australian  Radicals,  and  they  were  advocated  most 
vehemently  in  Victoria.  The  Jiritisli  Government  wisely 
allowed  the  colonists  to  have  their  own  way.  A  now  con- 
stitution,  transferring  complete  functions  of  self-govermnent 
to  two  legislative  chambers,  both  of  them  elected  wliolly  by 
tho  colonists  themselves,  under  a  governor  who  became  for 
all  practical  purposes  littlo  moro  than  their  chairman,  was 
proclaimed  on  the  23rd  of  November,  1855 ;  and  since  then 
tho  details  of  political  power,  roughly  fought  over  by  tho 
colonists  themselves,  have  been  gradually  tending  in  the  direc- 
tion of  uncurbed  democracy.  The  result  has  in  the  main  been 
satisfactory  to  all  who  consider  that  government  is  merely  a 
machine  for  forwarding  the  best  interests  of  all  classes  of 
the  governed,  and  that  any  machine  which  thus  works  most 
efficiently  is  tho  one  most  to  bo  commended.  The  colony  of 
Victoria  affords  the  interesting  spectacle  of  a  democracy, 
more  complete  even  than  that  of  the  United  States,  yet 
notably  loyal  to  the  sovereign  whose  name  it  bears. 

The  change  was  not  completely  brought  about  without 
much  quarrelling.  The  constitution  of  1855,  though  it  con- 
ceded to  the  colonists  the  right  of  electing  all  the  members 
of  both  Houses  of  Parhament,  was  held  by  many  to  be 
based  on  too  restricted  a  franchise ;  and  there  was  angry  con- 
troversy both  before  and  after  the  first  Parliament  in  ac- 
cordance wdth  it  met  in  November,  1856,  Sir  Charles 
Hotham  having  died,  and  Sir  Henry  Barkly  succeeding  him 
as  governor  in  the  following  December.  The  controversy 
continued  until  manhood  suffrage  for  the  Legislative 
Assembly,  and  a  £50  franchise  for  the  Legislative  Council, 
vote  by  ballot,  equal  electoral  districts,  triennial  elections, 
and  payment  of  members  for  the  Assembly,  had  been 
obtained  ;  and  some  of  these  concessions  were  not  procured 
till  1881. 

In  the  meanwhile  other  matters  of  dispute  arose.     The 


POLITICAL  CIIAXGES. 


281 


liberal,  and  at  first  perhaps  necessary  and  semcoablc.ways  in 
wliich  lar^'o  tracts  of  land  had  been  assi^Micd  to  early  settlers 
and  squatters,  caused  reasonable  alarm  and  K^'ave  incon- 
venience as  soon  as  the  resources  of  the  colony  had  bo^nin 
to  be  ri<,'htly  valued.  A  Land  Sales  Act  in  IHIH)  put  a  stop 
to  the  old  mode  of  distribution,  and  a  Land  Act  in  bSdiJ, 
))assed  with  much  dillicnlty,  reappropriated  so  much  of  tho 
land  as  was  deemed  suitable  for  a<,'riculture,  leaving'  tho 
sfpiatters  in  possession  only  of  their  pasture  lands.  Tho 
new  operations  consequent  on  this  law  increased  the  Govern- 
ment's revenue,  and  created  a  fresh  race  of  landowners  ; 
but  they  established  fresh  monopolies  which  were  not  after- 
wards looked  upon  with  favour. 

Another  question,  much  discussed  during  the  governor- 
ship of  Sir  Charles  Darling,  who  succeeded  Sir  Henry 
Barkly  in  18G3,  was  that  of  free  trade ;  the  Assembly,  in 
opposition  to  the  Legislative  Council  and  the  Crown,  insist- 
ing on  the  setting  up  of  protective  tariffs  against  the  im- 
portation of  such  commodities  as  it  was  considered  that  the 
colony  itself  should  be  encouraged  in  producing  ;  and  these 
tariffs  have  since  been  largely  increased  in  number  and 
scale.  Tho  amount  of  duty  levied  in  1884  on  imports  valued 
at  £19,201,633  was  £1,936,527,  a.n  average  of  more  than 
ten  per  cent.  By  this  policy,  however,  it  can  hardly  bo 
doubted  that  the  development  of  the  manufacturing  in- 
dustries in  Victoria  has  been  aided. 

In  many  ways  popular  government  in  Victoria  has  con- 
duced to  the  progress  of  the  colony.  As  early  as  1852,  ^Ir. 
H.  C.  E.  Childers,  t'len  Auditor-General,  proposed  the 
establishment  of  the  university  of  Melbourne,  and  his  p^'o- 
ject  took  shape  in  1854.  Great  attention  has  also  been  ptid 
to  secondary  and  elementary  education,  the  primary  system 
having  been  made  free,  secular,  and  compulsory  in  1873. 
All  the  railways,  of  which  there  were  1624  miles  open  in 
1884,  yielding  an  average  profit  of  4  per  cent.,  have  been 
constructed  and  worked  from  their  commencement  by  the 
Government. 


I 


rpr"^ 


282 


VICTORIA. 


%A 


^3 


l.|i 


i 


The  most  successful  governors  have  been  those  most  ready 
to  yield  to  the  current  of  public  opiuiou.  S'.  Charles 
Darling.',  after  three  years  of  squabbling  and  frequent  dead- 
locks in  the  administration,  was  replaced  in  18GG  by  Sir  T. 
II.  Manners-Sutton,  afterwards  Lord  Canterbury,  of  whom 
it  is  recorded  that  '  he  was  a  man  of  action,  not  of  words, 
never  intermeddhng  wlien  his  services  were  not  required, 
nor  neglecting  anything  within  the  proper  sphere  of  his 
duty.'  He  was  followed  by  an  unpopular  governor,  Sir 
George  Bowen,  in  1873,  and  afterwards  by  Lord  Normauby 
in  1879,  and  by  Sir  Henry  Brougham  Loch  in  1884. 

Melbourne  kept  its  jubilee  in  1886,  and  one  of  its  poets, 
J.  F.  Dariel,  then  sang  of  it : 


•  For  ages  wild  and  restless  waves  had  cast 
Their  burden  on  a  low,  untrodden  shore, 
Which  never  stately,  white-winged  ship  had  passed. 
Or  rugged  seaman  touched  with  friendly  oar  ; 
Where  never  loving  comrades  flocked  to  pour 
Their  boisterous  welcomes,  or  sweet  inaidins  came 
To  look  the  language  lips  were  shy  to  frame. 

'  Here,  'neath  the  scorching  heat  of  summer  days, 
The  shimmering  waves  stole  up  to  kiss  the  sands, 
And  the  fair  moon,  with  peerless  silver  rays, 
Lent  beauty  luminous  to  southern  lands, 
Whose  lonely,  wild,  yet  not  unlovely  strands 
Had  never  echoed  to  the  steps  of  men, 
Who  dreamed  of  unknown  worlds  beyond  their  ken. 

'  The  waters  of  this  noble  bay  were  fed 

By  a  pure  stream  which  no  pollution  knew  ; 
Man's  commerce  had  not  stirred  its  rocky  bed, 
But  on  its  banks  sweet-scented  wattles  grew. 
Amidst  whose  frequent  boughs  soft  love-birds  flew. 
And  magpies  poured,  from  glossy-plumaged  throats. 
Their  morning  song  of  rich  melodious  notes. 

'  From  out  the  scrub  that  fringed  the  river's  bank 
What  dusky,  strange  and  uncouth  formi^  emerge, 
With  matted  locks  that  cling  like  sedges  rank 
Round  gaunt  old  tree-trunks  on  the  water's  verge, 
Sons  of  the  forest  wild,  whose  plaintive  dirge — 
The  mournful  wail  of  hapless  destiny — 
The  sad  winds  carry  to  the  moaning  sea  ! 


ost  ready 
Charles 
ent  dead- 
by  Sir  T. 
of  wlioin 
of  words, 
required, 
re  of  his 
jrnor,  8ir 
lormaiiby 
1. 
its  poets, 


THE  JUBILEE  OF  MELBOURNE. 

'There  dawned,  at  lant,  a  day  when  all  was  changed  ; 

The  reNtlfHH  overflow  of  iiorthi-rn  lundM, 
From  Old  World  tliouK'hts  nnd  syinpathit'H  cHtranyed, 
Win^rd  south  their  way  in  liold  ndvj-ntiiroi-s  bandit, 
Ik'iiriny  conragooiis  htartH  and  vigorous  handx, 
To  carve  thiir  way  to  wealth  with  manly  ttjil, 
And  plant  dominion  in  pruduutivc-  huH. 

'  Here,  fifty  wintcrfl  HJnce,  hy  Yarra'n  Ktrt-am, 
A  Kcatturt'd  hamli-t  foinid  itn  modtst  place  ; 
What  mind  would  venture  then,  in  wildewt  dream 
Its  wondrouH  j^'rowth  and  eminence  to  truce  / 
What  Heer  predict  a  Mtripling  in  the  race 
Would,  Hwift  aH  Atulanta,  win  the  prize 
Of  progress,  'neath  the  world's  astunished  eyea  ? 

•  It  is  no  dream.     Upon  those  grass-grown  streets 

Has  risen  up  a  city  vast  and  fair. 

In  whose  thronged  thoroughfares  the  stranger  meets 
With  signs  of  all  the  world  can  send  most  rare 
And  costly  to  her  ma-ts,  and  everywhere 

Apcenda  the  hum  of  nervous,  bustling  strife — 

The  splendid  evidence  of  healthy  life. 

•  Where  stalwart  bushmen  lounged  through  sultry  hours, 

And  large-boned  oxen  bowed  beneath  the  yoke. 
Are  parks  and  gardens  rich  with  plants  and  flowers, 

Mansions  embowered  in  ash,  and  elm,  and  oak  ; 

Churches,  where  worshippers  Heaven's  aid  invoke. 
And  towers  and  steeples,  monuments  and  domes, 
Kise  amidst  crowded  haunts  and  peaceful  hoQiea.' 


283 


n. 


ew, 

ts. 


e, 


?i 


CHAPTER  XXV. 


-   \ 


,  I  i;  I 


d 


I  i 


i  1 


: » ^ 


«  » 


MODKllN    NKW    SOUTH    WALES. 

TlIK  r-ATKU  rUOOUF.SS  Ol'  NKW  SOUTH  WALKH — ITS  (iOLn-FIEM>S  ANO  THKIU 
I'lU'lT— SQUATTKK  KXTKNSIONS  — rOLITICAI.  CKOWTIl— MODKUN  SYDNICY  - 
ThK  PUKSKNT  CON'O'TION  OF  NKW  SOUTH  WALES—ITS  SHKKl'-UUNS  AND 
I'OAL-FIKLDS.      [ISfd-lSSS.  J 


>..3J^rinE  limits  of  tlio  colony  of  Now  Soutli  Wales, 
J^^  originally  comprising  about  1,500,000  square 
-'-^  miles,  and  thus  nearly  half  as  large  as  Europe, 
were  successively  curtailed,  as  vvc  have  seen,  by 
the  partition  of  the  three  colonies  of  Van  Die- 
men's  Land,  South  Australia,  and  Victoria,  which,  though 
all  three  constituted  less  than  a  third  of  the  entire  area — 
Van  Diemen's  Land  being  about  a  sixtieth.  South  Australia 
about  a  quarter,  and  Victoria  about  a  sixteenth — were  in 
value  very  much  more  than  a  third.  Of  the  1,000,000  or 
more  square  miles  left  to  New  South  Wales  in  1851,  only  a 
very  small  section  was  undor  cultivation  or  parcelled  out  in 
townships  ;  and  if  the  squatters  tended  their  sheep  in  far-off 
regions,  and  over  vast  extents  of  ground,  the  chief  portion  of 
the  territory  was  put  to  no  use  at  all.  Of  the  population  of 
189,957,  more  than  a  fourth  was  in  Sydney  and  its  suburbs, 
about  a  sixth  in  other  towns,  and  loss  than  half  spread  over 
the  neighbouring  country  districts. 

The  mother-colony,  however,  was  not  too  old  to  compete, 
and  that  successfully,  with  her  offspring.  She  had  by  this 
time,  indeed,  fairly  shaken  off  the  pernicious  influences  of 


riWGh'KSS  /N  AKW  SOUTH  IVALES. 


285 


convict  lifo  tliat  liad  marred  lior  early  career,  and  was  now 
able  to  vie  even  with  Victoria  as  a  nation  of  vigorous  and 
independent  men,  worthy  to  enjoy  the  powcsrs  of  complete 
Helf-govermnent  wisely  conferred  upon  them  by  Great  Britain. 
The  self -governing  powers  ol  New  South  Wales  almost 
kept  pace  with  those  of  Victoria.  The  old  constitution  was 
here,  as  in  the  south,  abolished  in  1H55,  and  the  colonists 
were  left  to  choose  their  own  legislative  machinery,  and 
alter  it  to  their  taste.  Except  that  the  Upp*^-"  House  of 
Parliament,  instead  of  being  elected  by  the  people  as  in 
Victoria,  continues  to  be  composed  of  Crown  nominees,  the 
machinery  is  now  almost  as  democratic  as  in  the  younger 
colony.  The  members  of  the  Lower  House  are  elected  by 
ballot  under  a  manhood  suilrage. 

The  later  growth  of  the  colony  is  mainly  due  to  the  dis- 
covery of  gold  in  the  district  of  liathurst,  which  has  already 
been  referred  to,  although,  as  the  liathurst  mines  were  by  no 
means  so  rich  as  those  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Ballarat, 
New  South  Wales,  while  it  had  quite  as  much  temporary 
derangement  as  Victoria,  has  profited  far  less.  The  entire 
yield  of  the  mines  near  the  Australian  A1])S  between  18oi 
and  18G8  was  only  worth  about  £30,000,000,  against  the 
£150,000,000  drawn  in  the  same  period  from  the  region  of 
the  Australian  Pyrenees. 

'  The  immediate  effect  of  the  discovery  in  Sydney  and 
throughout  the  colony,'  says  a  resident,  '  was  a  state  of 
society  in  which  there  was  the  minimum  of  comfort  com- 
bined wi^.h  the  maximum  of  expense.'*  *  There  was,'  says 
another,  *  a  heterogeneous  scramble  for  the  coveted  ore 
throughout  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  land.  Artisans  of 
every  description  threw  up  their  employments,  leaving  their 
masters  and  their  wives  and  families  to  take  care  of  them- 
selves. Nor  did  the  mania  confine  itself  to  the  labouring 
classes,  for  these  were  soon  followed  by  responsible  trades- 
men, farmers,  captains  of  vessels,  and  not  a  few  of  the 
superior  classes ;  some  unable  to  withstand  the  mania  and 

*  Thurry,  p.  3G8. 


i 


I; 


i' 


11  ^  •' 


'g)i_  J_ 

1 

1 

Ik 

IL 

Lm 

^mm 


^tmt 


286 


MODERN  NEW  SOUTH  WALES. 


•\  11 


f 

::;!!    \ 

"1 

\ 

1             I 

1 

1 

I 


•  » 

:  > 

:  •) 

•  i 
.3 


«  » 


% 


the  force  of  the  stream,  or  because  they  were  really  disposed 
to  venture  time  and  money  on  the  chance,  and  others 
because  they  were,  as  employers  of  labour,  left  in  the  lurch, 
and  had  no  alternative.'*  Some  went  to  Bathurst ;  more 
to  Ballarat,  or  Blount  Alexander,  or  Bendigo.  *  Sydney 
looked  like  a  deserted  village.  Then  the  judicious  purchaser 
stepped  in,  and  bought  whole  streets  of  unoccupied  houses 
for  hundreds,  which,  in  twelve  months  afterwards,  he  sold 
for  more  than  as  many  thousands.  In  1854  prices  rose  to 
quite  a  fever-height,  and  in  that  year  fabulous  riches  were 
realized.  Shopkeepers,  no  longer  selling  their  goods  at  a 
fair  value,  found  the  best  customers  in  those  to  whom  they 
charged  the  most  exorbitant  prices.  When  the  drapers 
were  dealing  with  the  diggers,  who  knew  nothing  of  the 
real  value  of  the  silks,  satins,  and  laces  with  which  they 
supplied  the  fair  companions  whom  they  treated,  the  custom 
was,  on  an  article  being  shown  to  them,  not  to  beat  down 
the  price,  but  to  ask,  "  Have  you  nothing  dearer  than  that  ?" 
On  such  a  hint,  of  course,  the  seller  acted,  and,  on  exhibit- 
ing a  showy  article  of  inferior  value,  but  on  which  was  put 
a  higher  price,  the  article  sold  immediately.'  t 

One  benefit  accruing  from  this  disorganized  state  of 
society  was  that  the  wealth  acquired  by  the  great  majority 
of  the  diggers,  men  unfit  to  put  it  to  good  uses,  quickly 
passed — though  often  through  demoralizing  channels,  the 
chief  of  all  being  gin-palaces — into  better  hands.  Much  of 
it  soon  left  the  colony  ;  but  more  remained,  to  be  employed 
in  older  and  more  productive  ways.  All  trades  in  New 
South  Wales  wore  greatly  stimulated  by  the  gold-discoveries, 
and,  in  the  end,  none  more  than  the  oldest  and  best — that 
of  wool-producing.  Squatters  became  more  numerous,  and 
their  operations  more  extensive.  After  driving  their  sheep 
far  south  and  far  west,  up  to  the  boundaries  of  Victoria  and 
South  Australia,  they  advanced  in  northerly  directions,  and 

*  Westgarth,  'Australia,'  pp.  109,  170. 
t  Therry,  pp.  370,  371. 


THE  GOLD  FEVER  AND  POLITICS. 


287 


thus  helped  in  the  formation  of  another,  and  at  present  the 
youngest  of  the  Australian  colonies. 

By  the  establishment,  in  1859,  of  Queensland  as  an  inde- 
pendent colony,  of  which  something  will  be  said  presently, 
New  South  Wales,  already  deprived  of  a  third  of  its  original 
territory,  was  mulcted  of  two-thirds  of  the  remainder.  Its 
area  was  now  reduced  to  310,938  square  miles.  It  was  still, 
however,  nearly  four  times  as  large  as  Victoria,  and  included 
some  of  the  most  fertile  and  salubrious  portions  of  the  great 
island  continent,  witn  a  convenient  coast-line  of  more  than 
800  miles.  Notwithstanding  the  loss  of  Queensland,  its 
population  nearly  doubled  between  1851  and  1861,  and  the 
numbers  rose  from  358,278  in  the  latter  year  to  503,981  in 
1871,  to  751,468  in  1881,  and  to  about  1,022,000  in  1887. 

More  than  a  generation  older  than  either  of  its  offshoots, 
New  South  Wales  had,  even  in  1855,  when  it  received  its 
new  constitution,  some  veteran  patriots  to  guide  it.  One  of 
these  was  the  poet  who  had  sung  its  praise^  thirty  years 
before.  William  Charles  Went  worth  took  the  lead  in  the 
demand  for  political  reform,  and  it  was  mainly  owing  to 
him  that,  while  the  new  House  of  Assembly  was  nearly  as 
democratic  as  that  of  Victoria,  the  Legislative  Council  was 
much  more  aristocratic  in  its  composition.  To  his  energy, 
moreover,  Sydney  owes  its  university,  opened  in  1851,  and 
enriched  by  the  benefactions  of  several  «.olonists,  one  of 
whom,  John  Henry  Chalh.-j,  bequeathed  to  it  £180,000  in 
1880. 

There  have  been  few  striking  incidents  in  the  later  history 
of  the  colony.  Its  ablest  governors  had  belonged  to  the 
times  when  they  had  responsible  work  to  do  as  controllers 
and  promoters  of  public  enterprise  ;  and  among  those  men 
General  Macquarie  and  Sir  Kichard  Bourke  had  had  a 
zealous  if  unpopular  successor  in  Sir  George  Gipps,  who 
ruled  from  1838  till  1846.  It  was  under  Sir  Charles  Fitzroy 
that  the  new  constitution  was  promulgated,  though  it  was 
first  put  in  force  under  Sir  William  Denison,  a  capable 
administrator  between  1855  and  1861.     He  was  followed  in 


i 

\\y 

%■  4 

&■ 

|,  - 

'')\ 

i  : 

1; 

■  :  , 

,  ''^ 

|i 

\l\ 

|-       ' 

•'' 

i 

288 


MODERN  NEW  SOUTH  WALES. 


' 

1 

1 

1 

Niwi 


1  i 

i  i 


■■k 


ITS; 


■5' 

is* 


turn  by  Sir  John  Young,  by  the  Earl  of  Belmorc,  by  Sir 
Hercules  Robinson — who  won  the  esteem  of  the  colonists 
between  1872  and  1879,  by  Lord  Augustus  Loftus,  and  by 
Lord  Carriiigton — who  took  ofiice  in  1885.  Little  more  than 
ceremonial  duties  have  devolved  on  those  governors,  however, 
and  they  have  been  satisfactory  in  proportion  to  their  tact 
in  humouring  the  people  without  interfering  in  serious  con- 
cerns. The  temper  of  these  people,  in  contrast  with  that 
of  their  neighbours  in  the  south-west,  has  been  described 
by  a  recent  writer.  '  Victoria,'  he  says,  *  is  democratic, 
progressive,  and  eager  for  colonial  federation.  New  South 
Wales  has  the  same  form  of  government — is  progressive, 
too,  in  its  more  deliberate  manner ;  but  it  is  conservative, 
old-fashioned,  in  favour  of  imperial  federation,  and  opposed 
to  colonial  federation,  which  it  fears  as  likely  to  lead — little 
as  the  Victorians  mean  it — to  eventual  separation  and  in- 
dependence. There  are  differences  of  tariff,  too,  and  a 
certain  rivalry  between  the  two  colonies.  Now  South  Wales 
is  the  elder  brother,  and  expects  a  deference  which  it  does 
not  always  meet  with.'* 

The  people  of  New  South  Wales  are  proud  of  their  capital 
— less  prosperous,  but  more  attractive,  than  Melbourne. 
'  Sydney  is  antique  for  Australia,'  said  the  same  writer  in 
1885.  *  The  convict  traces  have  lorg  disappeared,  but  you 
can  see,  in  the  narrow  and  winding  streets  in  the  business 
quarter,  that  it  is  not  a  modern  town  which  has  been  built 
mechanically  and  laid  out  upon  a  plan,  but  that  it  has  grown 
in  the  old  English  fashion.  There  are  handsome  streets, 
with  grand  fronts  and  arcades  ;  and  there  are  lanes  and 
alleys  as  in  London,  with  dull  unsightly  premises,  where, 
nevertheless,  active  business  is  going  on.  Trees  are  planted 
wherever  there  is  room  for  them  ;  and  there  is  ample  breath* 
ing-ground  in  the  parks.  After  various  fortunes,  trade  is 
now  develcping  with  extreme  rapidity,  and  the  ambition  of 
the  inhabitants  is  growing  along  with  it.  The  tonnage  of 
the  vessels  which  now  annually  enter  and  leave  the  port  of 

*  Froude,  '  Oceana,'  p.  140. 


)rc,  by  Sir 
e  colonists 
us,  and  by 
1  more  than 
s,  however, 
)  their  tact 
erioiis  con- 
;  with  that 
1  described 
democratic, 
New  South 
progressive, 
Dnservative, 
;nd  opposed 
lead — little 
iou  and  iu- 
too,  and  a 
)Outh  \Valcs 
tiich  it  does 

Lheir  capital 
Melbourne, 
le  writer  in 
red,  but  you 
ihe  business 
s  been  built 
it  has  grown 
ome  streets, 
e  lanes  and 
lises,  where, 
are  planted 
nple  breath- 
ics,  trade  is 
J  ambition  of 
e  tonnage  of 
e  the  port  of 


SYDNEY. 


289 


Sydney  exceeds  the  tonnage  of  the  Thames  in  the  first  year 
of  our  present  Queen.  As  in  London,  the  city  proper  on 
the  edge  of  the  harbour  is  given  up  to  warehouses,  com- 
mercial chambers  and  offices,  banks  and  public  buildings. 
In  the  daytime  it  is  thronged  ;  in  the  evening  the  hive 
empties  itself,  and  merchants,  clerks,  and  workmen  stream 
away  by  railway  or  ferry  to  their  suburban  houses.'* 

More  imposing  than  the  town,  however,  is  the  approach 
to  it  by  the  sea.  *  Sydney  proper,  the  old  Sydney  of  the 
first  settlement,  stands  on  a  long  neck  of  land  at  the  moutli 
of  the  Paramatta  Kiver,  between  two  deep  creeks  which 
form  its  harbour — that  is,  its  inner  harbour,  where  its  docks 
and  wharves  are.  Port  Jackson,  the  harbour  proper,  from 
which  these  are  mere  inlets,  is  the  largest  and  the  grandest 
in  the  world.  A  passage  about  a  mile  wide  has  been  cut  by 
the  ocean  between  the  wal'  of  sandstone  cliffs  which  stretch 
along  the  south-west  Australian  shores.  The  two  headlands 
stand  out  as  gigantic  piers,  and  the  tide  from  without,  and 
the  fresh- water  flood  from  within,  have  formed  an  inlet 
shaped  like  a  star-fish,  with  a  great  central  basin,  and  long 
arms  and  estuaries  which  pierce  the  land  in  all  directions, 
and  wind  like  veins  into  lofty  sandstone  banks.  The  rock 
is  gray  or  red.  Worn  by  the  rains  and  tides  of  a  thousand 
generations,  it  projects  in  overhanging  shelves,  or  breaks  off 
into  the  water,  and  lies  there  in  fallen  masses.  The  valleys 
thus  formed,  and  widening  and  broadening  with  age,  are 
clothed  universally  with  the  primeval  forest  of  eucalyptus 
and  dark  Australian  pine  —  the  eucalyptus  in  its  most 
protean  forms,  and  staining  its  foliage  in  the  most  varied 
colours ;  the  red  cliffs  standing  out  between  the  branches, 
or  split  and  rent  where  the  roots  have  driven  a  way  into 
their  crevices.  In  some  of  these  land-locked  reaches,  except 
for  the  sunshine  and  the  pure  blue  of  the  water,  I  could 
have  fancied  myself  among  the  yews  and  arbutuses  of  Kil- 
larney.  The  harbour  is,  on  an  average,  I  believe,  about  nine 
fathoms  deep.    The  few  shoals  are  marked,  and  vessels  of  the 

*  Froude,  p.  163. 

19 


'  ^\ 

y           1 

'flflj 

:   i 


|i      i 


290 


MODERN  NEW  SOUTH  WALES. 


'k 


ii 


ll'l 


IS 


I    : 


111 


largest  size  lie  in  any  part  of  it  in  perfect  security.  Sydney 
itself  is  about  seven  miles  from  the  open  sea.  The  entire 
circuit,  I  was  told,  if  you  follow  the  shore  around  all  the 
winding  inlets  from  bluff  to  bluff,  is  two  hundred  miles. 
There  is  little  tide,  and  therefore  no  unsightly  mud-banks 
are  uncovered  at  low-water.  It  has  the  aspect  and  character 
of  a  perfect  inland  lake,  save  for  the  sea  monsters — the 
unnumbered  sharks  which  glide  to  and  fro  beneath  the 
treacherous  surface.'* 

New  South  Wales,  as  a  separate  colony,  suffered  at  first 
from  the  loss  of  so  many  of  its  best  squatting  districts  when 
Queensland  was  cut  off  from  it  in  1859,  and  more  ruinous 
damage  has  come  to  it  from  the  reck'essness  with  which  in 
the  early  days  immense  tracts  of  its  best  land  were  allowed 
to  fall  into  the  hands  of  a  comparatively  small  number  of 
proprietors.  It  has  made  considerable,  if  not  very  steady 
or  rapid,  progress,  however,  both  in  pastoral  and  in 
agricultural  ways.  It  was  reckoned  that  there  were  seven 
million  sheep  in  it  in  1863,  eighteen  millions  in  1873,  and 
thirty-four  millions  in  1883,  nearly  230,000  square  miles 
being,  in  the  last  year,  occupied  as  sheep-runs.  The  value 
of  the  wool  exported,  which  was  £1,650,000  in  1856,  was 
£9,383,000  in  1884,  the  exports  of  all  other  produce  being 
together  worth  about  as  much.  The  agricultural  produce, 
including  fruit  as  well  as  grains,  is  large  and  steadily  in- 
creasing, but  scarcely  more  than  the  colony  itself  consumes. 
New  wealth,  however,  has  been  found  in  its  timber,  and, 
if  the  supply  of  gold  has  fallen  off,  that  of  other  minerals, 
especially  of  iron,  copper,  tin,  coal,  has  increased.  The 
iron  mines  have  only  lately  begun  to  be  worked,  the  yield 
in  1884  being  valued  at  no  more  than  £24,571,  while  the 
export  of  copper  in  the  same  year  was  worth  £416,179,  and 
that  of  tin  £521,587  ;  but  coal  has  proved  a  great  source  of 
profit.  In  1823  only  about  600  tons  of  coal  were  raised, 
and  in  1863  only  328.  Then  the  mines  began  to  be  made 
extensive  use  of,  in  the  desperate  but  well-founded  hope 

*  Froude,  p.  141. 


ka^  :  ilVj 


/TS  SHEEP-RUNS  AND  COAT- FIELDS. 


201 


that  by  their  help  New  South  Wrlc3  would  be  able  to 
regain  the  ground  it  had  lost  in  competition  with  the  younger 
and  more  enterprising  settlement  in  the  north.  In  18GG 
there  wore  raised  774,238  tons,  valued  at  £324,0-49,  of  wlii^h 
about  half  was  sold  to  the  neighbouring  colonies.  '  Such,' 
it  NVtiS  said  in  that  year,  '  is  the  present  rapidity  of  the 
growth  and  rise  to  power  of  Queensland,  such  the  apparent 
poverty  of  New  South  Wales,  that  were  the  question  merely 
one  between  the  Sydney  wheat-growers  and  the  cotton- 
planters  of  Brisbane  and  Kockhampton,  the  rich  tropical 
settlers  would  be  as  certain  of  the  foremost  position  in  any 
future  confederation  as  they  were  in  America  when  tlie 
struggle  lay  only  between  the  Carolinas  and  New  England. 
As  it  is,  just  as  America  was  first  saved  by  the  coal  of 
Pennsylvania  and  Oh'.o,  Austraha  will  be  saved  by  the 
coal  of  New  South  Wales.  Queensland  possesses  some 
small  stores  of  coal,  but  the  vast  preponderance  of  acreage 
of  the  great  power  of  the  future  lies  in  New  South  Wales. 
On  my  return  from  a  short  voyage  to  the  north,  I  visited 
the  coal-field  of  New  South  Wales,  at  Newcastle,  on  the 
Hunter.  The  beds  are  of  vast  extent.  They  lie  upon  the 
banks  of  a  navigable  river,  and  so  near  to  the  surface  that 
the  best  qualities  are  raised,  in  a  country  of  dear  labour,  at 
83.  or  9s.  a  ton,  and  delivered  on  board  ship  for  12s.  For 
manufacturing  purposes  the  coi*,!  is  perfect ;  for  steam  use 
it  is,  though  somewhat  "dirty,"  a  serviceable  fuel;  and 
copper  and  iron  are  found  in  close  proximity  to  the  beds 
The  Newcastle  and  Port  Jackson  fields  open  a  brilliant 
future  to  Sydney  in  these  times,  when  coal  is  king  in  a  far 
higher  degree  than  was  ever  cotton.  To  her  black  beds  the 
colony  will  owe  not  only  manufactures,  bringing  wealth 
and  population,  but  that  leisure  which  is  begotten  of  riches 
—leisure  that  brings  culture,  and  love  of  harmony  and 
truth.** 

That  prophecy  has  only  been  in  part  fulfilled,  and  Queens- 
land now  prospers  by  its  own  coal-mines  ;  but  in  New  South 
*  Dilke,  '  Greater  Britain,'  pp.  300,  301, 

19—2 


■1  t 


;   f 


292 


MODERN  NEW  SOUTH  WALES. 


Wales,  during  1884,  the  coal  dug  up  amounted  to  2,749,108 
tons,  and,  giving  employment  to  6,227  pitmen  and  others, 
was  valued  at  £1,303,076,  more  than  four  times  as  much  as 
in  1866.  This,  however,  was  chiefly  from  the  Newcastle 
district ;  and  it  is  estimated  that  the  coal-beds  in  the  vrhole 
of  New  South  Wales  extend  over  areas  measuring  in  all 
nearly  24,000  square  miles. 


! 


ft 


:.| 


!  , 


i    I 


I ; '! 


;y 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 


QUEENSLAND. 

ORIGIN  OP  THE  MORKTON  BAT  SKTTLEMENT— EARLY  MISRULE  IN  IT— THE 
ESTABLISHMENT  OF  QUEENSLAND  AS  A  SEPARATE  COLONY— ITS  RESOURCES 
AND  PROGRESS.      [1824-1888.] 

OME  portions  of  the  great  north-western  corner  of 
AustraHa,  which  was  established  as  a  separate 
colony  in  1859,  had  been  vaguely  known  and 
gradually  made  use  of  during  the  previous  genera- 
tion and  more.  Moreton  Bay,  on  which  Brisbane, 
the  present  capital,  is  built,  had  been  discovered  and  named, 
indeed,  in  1770,  by  Captain  Cook,  who  spoke  of  it  as  '  a  wide 
open  bay,  in  the  bottom  of  which  the  land  is  so  low  that  I 
could  but  just  see  it  from  the  topmast-head.'  Its  next  visi- 
tor was  Lieutenant  Flinders,  who  explored  part  of  the  coast 
in  1799,  and  in  1802  sailed  round  into  the  Gulf  of  Carpen- 
taria, thus  proving  that  Australia  was  divided  from  New 
Guinea  by  Torres  Strait.  After  him  Lieutenant  Phihp 
King  made  further  investigations  in  1817,  and  in  1823 
Lieutenant  Oxley  was  sent  out  by  the  New  South  Wales 
Government  to  choose  a  site  for  a  new  penal  settlement. 
He  chose  Moreton  Bay,  and  the  town  of  Brisbane  was 
started  with  the  landing  on  its  site  of  ,  batch  of  convicts 
in  1824. 

Moreton  Bay  Settlement,  as  it  was  called,  was  put  to  that 
use  until  1839,  it  and  the  neighbouring  interior  being  occa- 


5 ;-  ■; 


^    »■■ 


^lil 


II] 


li-j 


i  ■ 

1 

i          1    i' 

I 

1 

1! 

! 

1          ' 

i        j 

; 

) 

i     , 

,    ! 

i 

f 

1 
1 

'     i 

I  « 
■ » 

>  a 
.  1 


k 

':  * 
"I 

■'Si 

■V 

si' 

u.  %  1 


294 


QUEENSLAND. 


sioiially  explored  in  tlii;  interval,  tliou;,'h  with  s  jmo  dan^'cr, 
as  the  aborigiiios  who  had  wolconiod  Flinders  with  danciii;^ 
and  Binging  were  Hoon  turned  into  fierce  enemies  by  the 
cruel  treatment  they  received  from  the  convicts  and  their 
custodians,  and  from  the  squatters  who  joined  the  party. 
One  example  of  the  conflicts  that  arose  will  sutlice.  '  N(jt 
intimidated  either  by  the  presence  of  the  convicts  or  by  that 
of  the  Government  troopers,'  we  are  told,  '  the  natives 
"rushed  "  the  squatters'  runs,  stole  their  sheep,  killed  their 
cattle,  and  helped  themselves  to  whatever  else  they  hked. 
But  the  Government  police  organized  a  band  of  natives  to 
act  with  them  as  troopers,  determining  to  have  their  revenge, 
and  the  acts  of  atrocity  perpetrated  by  this  mixed  band, 
whether  with  the  knowledge  and  consent  of  the  squatters 
or  not,  were  perfectly  horrifying.  On  one  occasion,  for  in- 
stance, it  was  reported  that  a  white  man  had  been  murdered 
by  two  blacks.  The  band  of  black  and  white  troopers  took 
the  law  into  their  own  hands.  They  surrounded  the  tribe 
to  which  the  murderers  belonged,  whilst  holding  a  corroboree 
one  fine  moonlight  night,  and  fired  a  volley  of  shot  at  a  given 
signal  into  their  midst.  There  was  no  inquiry  into  the 
matter :  the  troopers  had  had  their  revenge :  that  was 
enough.'* 

In  such  ways  as  those  the  Moreton  Bay  district  was 
partly  cleared  of  the  aborigines,  and  prepared  ,for  English 
settlement,  but  the  settlement  only  began  to  have  healthy 
life  after  it  had  ceased  to  be  stocked  with  convicts.  Civili- 
zation commenced  in  it  in  1812,  when  it  was  thrown  open 
to  colonization,  and  free  men  were  encouraged  to  reside  in 
the  little  town  of  Brisbane  and  its  neighbourhood.  In  1816, 
however,  it  had  no  more  than  2,250  inhabitants,  nearly  all  in 
the  south,  on  what  were  now  the  borders  of  New  South  Wales, 
and  of  these  829  were  in  Brisbane,  and  103  were  in  Ipswich, 
then  the  only  other  town.  During  the  next  few  years  the 
resources  of  the  district  came  to  be  understood,  and  the 
first  shipful  of  immigrants  from  England,  which  arrived 
*  Allen,  '  History  of  Australia.' 


THE  MORETON  BA  Y  SETTLEMENT. 


295 


in  December,  1848,  led  the  way  for  many  others.     '  The 
whole  country  bounded  by  Moreton  Bay,'  it  was  said  in 
1849,  *  is  well  adapted  for  grazing  and  agricultural  fanning. 
Tlie  indigenous  timber  is  of  great  value.     The  mulbcrry-trco 
grows  very  luxuriantly.     The  climate  and  soil  appear  well 
suited  to  tlio  cultivation  of  the  sugar-cane,  cotton,  arrowroot, 
tobacco,  indigo,   and  other   tropical   products.     They   are 
also  admirably  adapted  for  the  production  of  every  species 
of  European  grain,  as  well  as  those  peculiar  to  warmer 
climates ;  for,  as  vegetation  goes  on  without  interruption  all 
the  year  round,  the  farmer  has  only  to  select,  for  the  growth 
of  any  description  of  grain,  the  peculiar  season  that  will  en- 
sure the  exact  temperature  required  to  bring  it  to  maturity. 
The  barley  harvest,  that  being  the  hardiest  grain,  comes 
immediately  after  the  colonial  winter,  the  wheat  harvest  at 
the  commencement  of  summer,  and  the  maiae  harvest  so 
late  as  to  give  that  intertropical  grain  the  full  benefit  of  the 
heat  of  summer.     The  Eughsh  potato,  and  the  Indian  or 
sweet  potato,   ^.re  both   cultivated  successfully.    Coal  is 
found  in  the   neighbourhood  of    the    Brisbane,   and    the 
fisheries  of  the  extensive  bay  and  coast  may  be  made  very 
profitable.'*     If  this  coast  region,  and  others  adjoining  it 
both  north  and  south,  were  found  to  be  excellently  adapted 
for  agricultural  pursuits,  the  vast  sweep  of  country  stretching 
inland,  embracing  high  mountains,  fertile  valleys,  and  rich 
table-lands,  was  no  less  fitted  to  the  needs  of  the  squatter, 
and,  after  he  had  helped  to  make  the  best  portions  too 
valuable  for  his  own  more  desultory  use,  for  farming  cultiva- 
tion. 

Much  of  the  great  Queensland  district  forms  an  Australia 
Felix  only  second  to  the  Australia  Felix  in  the  south.  The 
great  explorer  of  this  region  was  the  unfortunate  Dr.  Leich- 
hardt.  Sir  Thomas  Mitchell  also  visited  it  in  1845  and 
1846,  passing  northwards  from  Sydney,  and  then  in  a  north- 
western direction  towards  the  Gulf  of  Carpentaria,  visiting 
the  Darling  Downs  and  other  parts  already  known,  though 
*  Martin,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  483,  484. 


L    I 


. 


':  m 


:  i 


•  » 

•  « 
:  i 


I  -  ^ 

€  » 

ea 

Its 


jr/ 


(2UEESSLAND. 


still  uiiusotl,  and  onding  l)y  discovcriti^  a  beautiful  i)Iain, 
watorwl  by  many  streams,  besides  tlio  larj^er  one  to  wliieh 
lie  gave  the  name  of  Victoria.  '  The  soil,'  lie  said,  '  coiisibts 
of  rich  clay,  and  the  hollows  gave  birth  to  water-courses,  in 
most  of  which  water  was  abundant.  I  found,  at  length, 
that  I  might  travel  in  any  direction,  and  find  water  at  hand, 
v'/ithout  having  to  seek  the  river,  except  when  I  wished  to 
ascertain  its  general  course  and  observe  its  character.  The 
grass  consists  of  several  new  sorts,  one  of  which  springs 
green  from  the  old  stem.  The  plains  were  verdant.  Indeed, 
the  luxuriant  pasturage  surpassed  in  quality,  as  it  did  in 
extent,  anything  of  the  kind  I  had  ever  seen.  New  birds 
and  new  plants  marked  this  out  as  an  essentially  different 
region  from  any  I  had  previously  explored.  That  the  river 
is  the  most  important  of  Australia,  increasing  as  it  does  by 
successive  tributaries,  and  not  a  mere  product  of  distant 
ranges,  admits  of  no  dispute  ;  and  the  downs  and  plains  of 
Central  Australia,  through  which  it  flows,  seem  sufficient  to 
supply  the  whole  world  with  animal  food.'* 

Reports  like  that  induced  adventurous  squatters  gradually 
to  encroach  upon  the  hitherto  neglected  solitudes  in  the  far 
north,  and  as  other  adventurers  began  to  settle  in  consider- 
able numbers  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Moreton  Bay,  the  vast 
territory  was  in  time  fitted  to  become  a  colony  distinct  from 
New  South  Wales. 

The  change  was  made  in  December,  1859,  when  Queens- 
land, with  an  area  of  678,600  square  miles,  comprising  all 
the  country  north  of  28"  30'  south  latitude,  and  east  of  141* 
east  longitude,  was  parted  off  from  New  South  Wales.  In 
1851  it  had  8,575  inhabitants,  chiefly  resident  in  Brisbane 
and  its  neighbourhood.  In  1856  the  population  numbered 
17,082,  and  in  1859,  when  the  separation  took  place,  it 
amounted  to  25,146 — Brisbane,  the  capital,  having  7,000 
inhabitants,  and  Ipswich,  a  little  island  on  a  tributary  of  the 
Brisbane  Eiver,  about  4,500. 

Since  then  the  colony,  which  has  a  political  constitution 

*  Martin,  vol.  ii.,  p.  394, 


ITS  RAPID  GRniVT/f. 


297 


constitution 


very  similar  to  that  of  New  South  Wales,  has  grown  rapidly. 
Ill  I8()l  it  liacl  a  population  of  34, 307,  and  an  export  trado 
of  £709, 'OOO,  composed  almost  entirely  of  tlie  wool,  tallow, 
and  skins  obtained  from  about  4,000,000  sheep  and  560,000 
cattle.  By  1863  the  population  had  risen  to  61,640,  the 
stock  of  sheep  and  cattle  had  been  increased  by  half,  and 
the  trade  had  been  proportionately  augmented.  In  that 
year  there  were  two  memorable  additions  to  the  list  of 
colonial  produce.  Queensland  began  to  export  gold  and 
cotton.  Its  gold-mines  were  less  important  than  those  of 
the  south,  though  the  yield,  which  in  1863  was  only  worth 
£144,802,  had  risen  to  £593,516  in  1868.  When  it  was 
discovered  that  the  soil  and  chmate  were  adapted  to  the 
growth  of  cotton,  and  afterwards  of  the  sugar-cane — both  of 
them  commodities  peculiar,  within  the  island,  to  this  part 
of  Australia — Queensland  was,  however,  found  to  be  pos- 
sessed of  surer  and  larger  sources  of  wealth  than  gold-mines 
could  yield. 

'  Since  the  establishment  of  Queensland  in  December, 
1859,'  said  its  first  governor,  Sir  George  Bo  wen,  at  the  close 
of  1865,  *  our  European  population  has  increased  from  25,000 
to  nearly  90,000 ;  that  is,  it  has  been  augmented  nearly  four- 
fold ;  while  our  revenue  and  our  trade,  including  imports 
and  exports,  have  been  more  than  trebled.  The  other  chief 
elements  of  material  prosperity  have  advanced  in  almost 
equal  proportions.  Cotton,  sugar,  and  tobacco  have  been 
added  to  our  lists  of  staple  products.  A  line  of  new  ports 
has  been  opened  along  our  eastern  seaboard  from  Keppel 
Bay  to  Cape  York,  a  distance  of  a  thousand  miles  ;  while 
pastoral  occupation  has  spread  over  an  additional  area 
at  least  four  times  larger  than  the  area  of  the  United 
Kingdom.  In  1859  our  settlers  had  hardly  advanced  beyond 
the  Darhng  Downs  to  the  west,  or  beyond  Rockhampton  to 
the  north.  Now,  in  1865,  there  are  stations  seven  hundred 
miles  to  the  west  of  Brisbane,  and  eight  hundred  miles  to 
the  north  of  Eockhampton.'* 

*  *  Reports  of  Colonial  Governors  (1865),*  part  ii.,  p.  23. 


.J' 

1  }t 

t 

^1 


^'    1 


i   P 


1 


'I 

I 

i 


(!      I 


■    Ml'       ■: 


!  i 


298 


OUEENSLAND. 


• » 

.•) 
•  3 

;  J 

I  -    .. 

t      » 

:;! 

3i 


During  the  next  twenty  years  Queensland  continued  to 
advance  by  rapid  strides,  though  with  occasional  reverses. 
In  1877  it  had  a  population  of  203,084,  but  in  that  and  the 
followiiig  year  a  severe  drought  caused  serious  damage  to  the 
pastoral  and  other  industries.  In  1879  it  revived,  and  it 
made  further  progress,  though  another  disastrous  drought 
occurred  in  1884  and  1885.  Its  population,  exclusive  of 
aborigines,  increased  from  213,525  in  1881  to  322,853  iu 
1885.  Of  these  latter  10,500  were  Chinese  and  11,327  were 
Polynesians.  The  immigrants  who  had  arrived  in  the 
course  of  the  year  from  Europe,  nearly  all  of  them  with 
free  or  assisted  passages,  numbered  10,774. 

The  Queensland  Government  prudently  continued  the 
policy  of  encouraging  suitable  Europeans  to  settle  in  its 
sparsely  occupied  districts  long  after  the  plan  had  been 
abandoned  by  the  more  populous  colonies  in  the  south.  Its 
other  human  importations  were  in  keeping  with  the  condi- 
tions of  life  and  industry  in  a  region  which  lias  more 
resemblance  to  the  southern  parts  of  the  United  States 
than  occurs  in  any  other  portions  of  Australia.  Sugar, 
rum,  cotton,  tobacco,  arrowroot,  and  other  tropical  com- 
modities are  produced  in  it,  though  not  yet  in  very  large 
quantities  or  with  regular  profit,  and  for  this  purpose  a 
modiiied  form  of  slavery  was  adopted  in  the  employment  of 
Polynesians  enticed  from  the  South  Sea  Islands,  as  well  as 
of  coolies  from  India,  the  Chinese  being  willing  and  often 
unwelcome  settlers  in  this  as  in  the  other  Australian 
colonies.  The  abuse,  which  threatened  at  one  time  to  be 
serious,  was  soon  checked  by  the  progress  of  public  opinion ; 
but  the  sugar-planters  and  cotton-growers  were  not  at  once 
able  to  adapt  themselves  to  worthier  methods  of  utilizing  the 
great  resources  at  their  command. 

Queensland  is  rich  in  copper,  tin,  iron,  coal,  and  other 
minerals,  besides  the  gold  which  has  till  lately  been  chietly 
sought  after,  and  its  vast  interior  is  available  for  the  pro- 
duction of  all  sorts  of  grain  as  well  as  of  wool,  which  has 
thus  far  been  its  principal  export.    For  this,  however,  more 


ITS  PRESENT  CONDITION. 


299 


railways  and  otiier  moans  of  communication  than  now  exist 
are  needed.  Even  in  188G  considerably  more  than  half  the 
whole  population  was  in  Brisbane,  which  then  had  about 
73,000  inhabitants,  and  its  neighbourhood  in  the  south,  the 
rest  being  chiefly  on  and  near  the  coast  as  far  as  Townville, 
which  is  less  than  half-way  between  Brisbane  and  the 
northern  limit  of  the  colony.  The  interior  is  siili  mainly, 
though  thinly,  peopled  by  aborigines,  numbering  about  20,000. 
The  blacks  are  in  some  respects  superior  to  the  natives  in 
the  south  and  west,  and  less  injured  by  the  white  man's 
encroachments  upon  them,  except  in  the  more  cultivated 
districts,  where  rum  has  been  one  of  the  agents  for  their  utter 
degradation. 

Sir  George  Bo  wen,  the  first  and  most  successful  governor 
of  Queensland,  was  transferred  to  New  Zealand  in  18G8. 
After  him  its  affairs  were  administered  by  Lord  Normanby 
from  1871  to  1874,  when  he  also  was  sent  to  New  Zealand, 
and  by  Sir  Arthur  Kennedy  between  1877  and  1883,  in  which 
year  Sir  Anthony  Musgrave  took  charge  of  the  colony. 
The  duties  of  the  representatives  of  the  Crown  are  more 
responsible  in  Queensland  than  in  the  southern  and  more 
finnly  established  colonies,  where  it  has  been  found  ex- 
pedient or  inevitable  to  allow  almost  unrestrained  self 
government.  In  Queensland  the  electorate  for  the  House 
of  Assembly  is  limited  by  a  £10  franchise,  and  the  members 
of  the  Legislative  Council  are,  as  in  New  South  Wales, 
nominated  by  the  Crown  for  life. 


^'  ■  .  f? 


am 


t 

'■ 

1  i 

!     *■ 

V 

j    ,  , 

II 


5i;- 


iU 


|i 


if! 


4 

- "  ift 
''  - 

•a     *" 

.<  » 

■Si 

:  i 


^1 


CHAPTER  XXVII. 

WEST  AUSTKALIA  AND  WASTE  AUSTRALIA. 

ORIGIN  OF  THE  SWAN  RIVER  SETTLEMENT,  OR  WESTERN  AUSTRALIA — EARLY 
MISFORTUNES  OF  THE  COLONY — ITS  PRESENT  CONDITION — EXPLORATIONS 
IN  THE  INTERIOR  OF  THE  AUSTRALIAN  CONTINENT  — THE  FIRST  DIS- 
COVERERS ;  8TURT,  MURRAY',  EYRE,  LEICHHARDT  ;  STURT  AGAIN  ;  STUART  ; 
BURKE  AND   WILLS— THE  CHARACTER  OF  THE   INTERIOR.      [1827-1888.] 

IjDER  as  an  independent  colony  than  South 
Austraha,  Victoria,  or  Queensland,  but  less 
prosperous  than  any  of  them,  is  the  settlemeni 
of  Western  Australia,  originally  intended  to 
consist  of  uil  the  great  island-continent  which 
was  not  comprised  in  New  South  Wales. 

Swan  River,  near  which  still  clusters  most  of  the  colony's 
feeble  life,  was  first  visited  in  1697  by  Vlaming,  a  Dutch 
navigator,  who  gave  it  its  name  in  consequence  of  the 
number  of  black  swans  that  he  there  found ,  but  little  was 
thought  of  the  district  till  1827,  when  Captain  Stirling,  of 
the  Success,  called  attention  to  it,  and  urged  the  importance 
of  its  immediate  occupation  so  as  to  preven^j  its  being  con- 
verted, as  was  thought  likely,  into  a  French  settlement. 
Early  in  1829  Captain  Freemantle  was  sent  in  the  Challenger 
to  take  formal  possession  of  the  country  on  behalf  of  the 
English  Crown ;  and  before  the  close  of  the  year  twenty- 
five  ships  had  arrived  at  Swan  River  from  England  bearing 
850  emigrants,  57  horses,  106  pigs,  204  cows,  and  1,096 
sheep.     In  1830  there  arrived  1125  other  settlers,  and  more 


THE  SWAN  RIVER  SETTLEMENT. 


301 


horses,  pigs,  cows,  and  sheep,  and  there  were  further, 
though  not  very  considerable,  importations  of  men  and 
animals  in  the  following  years. 

But  the  first  colonists  found  themselves  lodged  on  a 
barren  coast,  unfit  for  the  agricultural  and  prstoral  enter- 
prise for  which,  had  other  things  been  favourable,  they  had 
no  great  aptitude,  and  they  wore  seriously  harassed  by  the 
multitudes  of  hostile  natives,  who  resented  this  intrusion  on 
their  barbaric  privileges.  Great  misery  was  the  result,  and 
it  was  not  lessened  by  the  civil,  naval,  and  military  ofiQcers 
in  charge  of  the  experiment,  who  divided  among  themselves 
about  300,000  acres  of  the  best  land  that  was  to  be  obtained, 
shifting  their  dominions  as  often  as  one  district  after  another 
was  found  or  thought  to  be  preferable.  The  emigrants  had 
come  out  under  promise  of  also  receiving  grants  of  land ; 
but  only  the  most  useless  parts  were  left  for  them.  The 
result  was  deplorable.  '  The  entire  material  of  a  settlement,' 
they  said,  in  an  indignant  protest  forvarded  to  the  British 
Government  in  1831,  '  the  ofiBcial  staff,  settlers,  property, 
and  live  stock,  were  hurried  out  to  an  unknown  wilderness 
before  one  acre  was  surveyed,  before  one  building  had  been 
erected,  before  even  a  guess  had  been  formed  as  to  the  proper 
scene  of  their  labours,  and  before  the  slightest  knowledge 
had  been  obtained  of  the  soil,  climate,  products,  or  in- 
habitants. Nay,  further,  it  was  absolutely  made  a  condition 
of  the  grants  of  land  that  the  emigrant  should  bring  his 
family,  dependents,  and  property  into  the  colony  while  in 
this  state.  The  ghastly  spectacle  of  the  town-site  of 
Clarence — its  sole  edifices  crowded,  buried,  and  neglected 
tombs — its  only  inhabitants  corpses,  the  victims  of  disease, 
starvation,  and  daspair — the  sea-beach  strewed  with  wrecks 
— the  hills  and  borders  of  the  rivers  studded  with  deserted 
and  half-finished  buildings — bears  witness  to  these  con- 
sequences, and  speaks  of  brave  men,  delicate  females,  and 
helpless  children  perishing  by  hundreds  on  a  desert  coast 
from  want  of  food,  of  shelter,  and  even  of  water,  and 
surrounded  by  armed  hordes  of  angry  savages.    It  were 


'  .'i 


'  ii 


1'^ 


ar 


;5r- 


M 


M] 


i  \ 


i 


•  i; 

I    !  ; 


lit 


i 


■'    t  ! 


'■1 

i   i 

1:1 


■ "  I* 

■;^ 

I"  -. 

•■<i 

'  J'  F«. 

^  V 
M, 

III 


j  I, 


302     WEST  AUSTRALIA  AND  WASTE  AUSTRALIA. 

impossible  to  estimate  the  vast  amount  of  property  of  every 
sort  buried  for  safety  in  the  sands  of  the  shore,  and  never 
again  recovered,  or  the  vast  multitude  of  most  valuable  aud 
high-bred  stock  of  all  descriptions,  whose  skeletons  whitened 
the  beach  or  filled  the  morasses  they  had  been  forced  to 
enter  in  the  desperate  search  for  even  fresh  water.'*  The 
blame  attaching  to  those  who  led  them  into  this  condition 
was,  of  course,  shared  by  the  emigrants  who  suffered  them- 
selves to  be  so  led  ;  but  they  paid  the  full  penalty  for  their 
folly.  *  Some,'  wo  are  told,  '  demanded  to  be  led  to  their 
lands  ;  others  gave  way  to  despair ;  servants  attacked  the 
spirit-casks  ;  masters  follow^ed  their  example.  The  farmers 
were  told  they  must  wait — wait  till  lands  were  discovered, 
and  then  wait  until  they  were  surveyed.  A  quarter  of  a 
million  sterling  of  property  was  destroyed ;  the  means  of 
the  immigrants  dissipated  ;  their  live-stock  perished  ;  many 
died ;  and  numbers,  as  soon  as  practicable,  fled  from  this 
scene  of  ruin,  carrying  with  them  the  wreck  of  their 
fortunes.'! 

That  was  the  dismal  beginning  of  the  Swan  River  Settle- 
ment, afterwards  known  as  Western  Australia,  intended  to 
turn  into  an  English  colony  the  978,000  square  miles  of  land 
assigned  as  its  limits,  being  the  whole  of  Australia  west  of 
the  129th  degree  of  east  longitude.  Slowly  and  painfully, 
however,  those  who  survived  the  first  hardships,  and  the 
many  new-comers  who  left  England  in  ignorance  of  the  lot 
awaiting  them,  or  who  boldly  hoped  that,  amid  the  failures 
of  others,  they  might  find  ways  of  succeeding,  brought  some 
sort  of  order  and  progress  into  the  colony.  The  town  of 
Perth  was  built  on  a  well-chosen  site  bv  the  side  of  the 
Swan  River,  and  Ereemantle  was  appointed  as  its  port,  at 
the  entrance  of  the  river  into  the  Indian  Ocean.  The 
village  of  Albany,  destined  to  become  a  town,  was  planted 
by  St.  George's  Sound,  on  the  southern  coast,  and  other 
settlements  were  formed  along  the  shore,  and  here  and  there 

*  Tariianientary  Emigration  Papers  '  for  1849-50. 
t  Martin,  vol.  ii.,  p.  713. 


A  STRUGGLING  COLONY. 


303 


inland.  The  country  was  gradually  found  to  be  less  in- 
hospitable than  at  first  it  seemed,  and  the  coloni  is  who 
were  able  to  endure  the  difficulties  of  their  strange  life 
slowly  secured  for  themselves  a  measure  of  prosperity  by 
sheep-farming  and  agriculture.  In  1834  the  colony  con- 
tained about  1,600  English  inhabitants  and  some  3,500 
sheep,  and  there  were  9x8  acres  of  land  under  cultivation, 
lu  1842  there  were  3,476  colonists  and  60,380  sheep,  yielding 
84,640  pounds  of  wool,  and  the  cultivated  land  comprised 
3,364  acres.  In  1848  the  people  numbered  4,622  and  the 
sheep  141,123;  the  wool  exported  amounted  to  301,965 
pounds,  and  157,855  acres  of  land  were  under  tillage. 

In  1849,  finding  that  very  few  new  immigrants  arrived, 
and  that  the  progress  of  the  colony  was  crippled  by  scarcity 
of  labour,  the  West  Australians  petitioned  that  their  numbers 
might  be  augmented  by  convicts  ;  and  the  petition  was 
readily  acceded  to,  as  the  Tasmanians  had  refused,  with  a 
vehemence  that  could  not  be  disregarded,  to  receive  any 
more,  and  as  New  South  Wales  had  long  before  been  freed 
from  them.  By  this  means  almost  exclusively  the  popula- 
tion of  West  Australia  was  increased  during  the  next 
twenty  years ;  but  even  this  questionable  advantage  was 
removed  in  1868,  at  the  earnest  entreaty  of  the  Victorians 
and  other  colonists  of  Australia,  who  resented  the  coming 
among  them  of  runaway  or  liberated  criminals  from  the 
west.  Their  distant  neighbours  took  a  different  view.  *  The 
convicts  available  for  public  works,'  said  the  Governor  of 
Western  Australia  in  1866,  *  have  been  distributed  through- 
out the  colony,  in  repairing  and  making  roads  and  bridges, 
and  generally  on  works  for  the  benefit  of  the  whole  com- 
munity. A  natural  feeling  of  apprehension  exists  that  the 
approaching  cessation  of  transportation  will  throw  a  heavy 
burden  on  the  colonists  in  respect  of  the  keeping  in  order  of 
the  public  highways.'* 

In  1866  there  were  about  10,000  convicts  or  *  emancipists  * 
in  the  colony,  out  of  an  English  population  of  21,065. 
*  '  Colonial  Governors'  Reports,'  1867,  part  ii.,  p.  70. 


>      -^^ 


\\ 

N 

i  ;' 


i  ■!■ 


I'     urn  w 


304     WEST  AU.STR ALIA  AND  WASTE  AUSTRALIA. 


1    ' 


hi 


m 

;  i 
i 
1 1 


rj 


:)* 


■'3 


•■<a 

3  5' 

,  ,51 

If.    1^ 


^11 


.  I, 


Among  that  number  there  were,  in  a  single  year,  about 
3,500  convictions  for  offences.  Dismal  accounts  are  given 
by  travellers  of  the  contamination  produced  among  nearly 
all  classes  by  the  presence  of  so  many  criminals.  '  The 
contrast  between  the  scenery  and  the  people  of  "West 
Australia,'  says  one,  *  is  great  indeed.  The  aboriginal  in- 
habitants of  Albany  were  represented  by  a  tribo  of  filthy 
natives — tall,  half-starved,  their  heads  bedaubed  with  red 
ochre,  and  their  faces  smeared  with  yellow  clay;  the 
colonists  by  a  gang  of  fiend-faced  convicts,  working  in 
chains  upon  the  esplanade,  and  a  group  of  scowling  expirees 
hunting  a  monkey  with  bull-dogs  on  the  pier ;  while  tha 
native  women,  half  clothed  in  tattered  kangaroo-skins,  came 
slouching  past  with  an  aspect  of  defiant  wretchedness.  On 
the  road  between  Albany  and  Hamilton  I  saw  a  man  at 
work  in  ponderous  irons.  The  sun  was  striking  down  upon 
him  in  a  way  that  none  can  fancy  who  have  no  experience 
of  Western  Australia  or  Bengal,  and  his  labour  was  of  the 
heaviest ;  now  he  had  to  prise  up  huge  rocks  with  a  crowbar, 
now  to  handle  pick  and  shovel,  now  to  use  the  rammer, 
under  the  eye  of  an  armed  warder  who  idled  in  the  shade 
by  the  roadside.  This  was  an  "  escape  man,"  thus  treated 
with  a  view  to  cause  him  to  cease  his  continual  endeavours 
to  get  away  from  Albany.  Work  is  never  done  in  West 
Australia  unless  under  the  compulsion  of  the  lash,  for  a 
similar  degradation  of  labour  is  produced  by  the  use  of 
convicts  as  by  that  of  slaves.  The  convicts  and  their  keepers 
form  two-thirds  of  the  whole  population,  and  the  district 
is  a  great  English  prison,  not  a  colony,  and  exports  but  a 
little  sandal-wood  and  a  little  cotton.'* 

In  the  ensuing  twenty  years  the  convict  element,  which 
had  been  to  some  extent  useful  in  clearing  the  way  for  other 
settlers,  was  almost  worked  out  of  the  population,  which 
rose  from  24,785  in  1870  to  29,708  in  1881,  and  was  about 
40,000  in  1887.  New-comers  were  few,  but  the  families 
settled  in  the  colony  grew  in  numbers,  and,  with  scanty 

*  DUke,  pp.  176,  177. 


WESTERN  AUSTRALIA. 


30S 


opportunities  of  growing  rich,  were  moderately  prosperous. 
'  The  people  of  Western  Australia,'  said  Sir  Frederick  Napier 
Broome,  the  most  distinguished  and  enterprising  of  its  gover- 
nors, in  1885,  '  if  not  wealthy,  are,  in  their  smaller  way,  a 
very  comfortably  well-off  community.  Every  West  Austra^ 
lian  may  have  his  fowl  in  the  pot,  and  something  more, 
and  the  colony  can  boast  many  a  substantial  homestead,  and 
even  some  rich  men.  During  the  last  ten  years,  the  public 
revenue  has  doubled,  real  progress  has  been  made,  and  it  is 
beginning  to  be  seen  that,  though  we  may  not  have  the  gold 
mines  which  have  built  Melbourne,  or  the  wide  and  con- 
tinuous expanse  of  wheat-growing  land  which  lies  behind 
Adelaide,  we  possess  solid  and  various  resources  capable  of 
great  development.  With  many  fertile  tracts,  with  its  timber 
and  its  minerals,  and  with  a  population  far  less  than  peoples 
the  barren  Ked  Sea  coasts,  scattered  over  a  million  square 
miles,  it  stands  to  reason  that  Western  Austraha  has  room 
and  to  spare  for  many  times  its  present  complement  of 
settlers.  It  has  as  yet  been  scarcely  tried  on  any  sound 
scheme  and  considerable  scale  as  a  field  for  the  emigration 
of  the  labouring  classes.  It  is  true  that  there  are  many 
barren  tracts.  If  there  were  not,  it  could  maintain  fifty 
million  people  instead  of  the  two  millions  or  so  which  there 
can  be  little  doubt  that  it  will  one  day  feed.'* 

Western  Australia  is  the  only  Crown  colony  in  the  island, 
its  alfairs  being  administered  by  a  governor  and  his  execu- 
tive, with  the  assistance  of  a  Legislative  Council,  of  which 
four  members  are  officials,  four  nominated  by  the  governor, 
and  sixteen  elected  under  a  £10  franchise.  Its  exports  in 
1886  amounted  to  only  £630,393  in  value,  wool  being  the 
largest  item,  and  after  it  pearls  and  timber.  Of  timber  there 
is  a  boundless  supply  in  the  vast  forests  of  gigantic  jarrah, 
and  yet  more  gigantic  karri,  two  varieties  of  eucalyptus, 
from  the  latter  of  which  planks  of  wood,  nearly  as  firm  as 
iron,  and  a  hundred  feet  long,  and  twelve  or  twenty  feet 
wide,  can  be  obtained.  But  neither  of  these  forests,  nor  of 
*  A  Paper  read  before  the  Royal  Colonial  Institute. 

20 


.i 


3o6    WEST  AUSTRALIA  AND  WASTE  AUSTRALIA. 


\\ 


W\' 


ll;l 
\\'\ 


I; 


'a 

i! 

^1 


); 


the  mineral  treaHures  of  tlie  colony,  lias  any  considerable 
use  yet  been  made  by  the  inhabitants,  of  whom  nearly  half 
are  in  Perth,  the  capital,  or  in  Freemantle,  at  the  mouth 
of  the  Swan  River,  the  only  other  important  town,  and  less 
than  a  fourth  are  outside  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of 
the  original  settlement.  The  almost  boundless  regions  of 
the  interior  have  as  yet  been  hardly  visited  by  white  men. 

In  the  exploration  of  that  interior,  hovN^ever,  both  in  the 
parts  belonging  to  West  Australia  and  the  parts  belonging 
to  Queensland  and  South  Australia,  much  has  been  done. 
I'o  some  of  the  exploring  expeditions  slight  reference  has 
already  been  made.  Here  it  will  be  convenient  to  describe 
briefly  all  the  most  important  of  them.  They  constitute  a 
story  of  heroic  exploits  in  overland  travel  only  surpassed,  in 
modern  times,  by  the  successive  voyages  undertaken  in 
Arctic  seas  by  the  precursors  of  Sir  John  Franklin,  and 
those  who  sought  to  rescue  him,  or  at  any  rate  to  discover 
his  fate ;  and  by  Livingstone  and  other  explorers  in  Central 
Africa. 

The  work  was  begun  at  Sydney  while  it  was  the  nucleus 
of  all  the  later  colonization  and  civilization  of  Australia.  The 
coast  and  narrow  strip  of  land  about  Sydney  alone  were 
known  before  1813,  when  Blaxland,  Lawson,  and  Went- 
worth  crossed  the  Blue  Mountains,  and  when  Evans  visited 
Bathurst  and  discovered  the  river  Lachlan.  But  those 
modest  achievements  were  quickly  followed  by  others  of 
greater  magnitude,  some  of  the  bravest  being  those  which 
have  been  of  least  value  in  opening  up  new  fields  for  English 
settlement. 

In  1817  and  1818  Oxley  traced  the  Lachlan  and  the  Mac- 
quarie  down  a  great  part  of  their  course.  In  1824,  Hovell 
and  Hume  tracked  the  road  from  Sydney  to  Port  Phillip, 
now  Victoria.  In  1827  Allan  Cunningham,  the  botanist,  dis- 
covered the  Darling  Downs  ;  and  in  later  years,  as  has  been 
already  noticed,  all  the  eastern  parts  of  Australia,  north  and 
south  of  Sydney,  now  included  in  Victoria  and  Queensland, 
were  visited. 


T 


INL  A  ND  EXPL  OR  A  TIONS. 


307 


Mvorc  adventurous  than  any  of  his  predecessors  was 
Captain  Charles  Sturt,  who  started  on  the  first  of  three 
famous  expeditions  in  1828.  Several  rivers,  large  and 
small,  had  been  found  by  inland  travellers ;  but  the  coast 
explorers  had  not  observed  their  outlets  into  the  sea. 
Hence  arose  the  theory  that  there  was  a  great  lake  in  the 
interior  into  which  the  rivers  emptied  themselves.  Sturt 
was  its  chief  supporter,  and  in  the  hope  of  proving  it  all 
his  journeys  were  undertaken.  In  1828  he  discovered  the 
Darling,  and  followed  it  almost  to  the  point  of  its  junction 
with  the  Murray.  In  1830  he  tracked  the  Murray  to  its 
mouth  in  Encounter  Bay,  though,  wedded  to  the  inland- 
lake  theory,  he  refused  to  believe  that  that  was  its  only  or 
chief  outlet.  On  this  occasion,  in  an  open  whale-boat,  with 
a  crew  of  five,  he  rowed  a  thousand  miles  from  his  starting- 
point  on  the  Murrumbidgee,  a  branch  of  the  Murray,  more 
than  once  having  to  fight  his  way  through  tribes  of  hostile 
natives,  and  during  the  thousand  miles'  return  journey  he 
and  his  followers  had  little  but  flour  for  food.  *  Seventy- 
seven  days  after  starting,'  we  are  told,  *  they  reached  the 
place  where  they  had  built  their  boat,  having  in  the  interim 
rowed  at  least  two  thousand  miles.  Here  a  terrible  disap- 
pointment awaited  them.  They  had  expected  all  along  that 
provisions  would  have  been  sent  from  Sydney  to  this  point. 
The  hope  of  this  had  buoyed  them  up  amid  all  their 
fatigues.  But  the  depot  was  just  as  they  had  left  it,  and 
no  one  was  there.  The  next  rendezvous  was  two  hundred 
miles  away,  and  Sturt  remembered  with  bitterness  that  he 
liad  told  his  companions  that  they  need  not  come  farther 
down  unless  some  extraordinary  delay  took  place.  It  was 
useless  therefore  to  expect  them,  so  the  boat  proceeded 
onward.  For  seventeen  days  longer  they  pulled  against  the 
stream.  The  daily  journeys  became  gradually  shorter  and 
shorter.  No  murmur,  however,  escaped  the  crew,  as  they 
sat  in  the  boat,  pale  and  emaciated,  and  pulled  against  the 
current.  At  night,  in  their  tents,  before  sleeping,  when 
Sturt's  presence  no  longer  controlled  them,  their  sufferings 

20—2 


iv1 


■.  ■' '  1 

i\ 

I    ■•: 


'  ! 


u 


p 


I- 


^11 


I  -r 


308    WEST  AUSTRALIA  AMD  WASTE  AUSTRALIA. 

\voiil(l  find  an  utterance.  "  I  frequently,"  says  Sturt, 
"  heard  them  complain  of  great  pain  and  severe  exhaustion. 
•  I  must  tell  the  captain,'  some  of  them  would  say,  '  that  I 
can  pull  no  more.'  "  To-morrow  came,  and  they  pulled  on. 
At  last,,  one  of  tliem  became  deranged,  and  the  otliers  fairly 
gave  up.  This  was  still  ninety  miles  from  the  depot,  but 
they  absolutely  could  not  take  the  boat  any  farther.  Reluc- 
tantly they  drew  it  on  shore,  and  two  of  the  strongest  men 
were  sent  in  advance,  and  the  rest  waited.  For  six  days 
there  was  no  sign  of  their  return.  The  last  day's  provisions 
had  been  served  out,  and  then  they  thought  of  nothing  but 
saving  their  lives.  The  specimens  were  buried  in  cases 
made  of  the  whale-boat,  and  they  resolved  next  day  to 
follow  in  the  track  of  their  comrades.  That  next  day,  how- 
ever, brought  them  the  long-expected  relief.  This  was  the 
last  of  their  trials,  and  exactly  six  mouths  after  leaving  they 
were  all  safe  back  again  in  Sydney.'* 

lu  such  narratives  of  hazardous  achievements  and  hair- 
breadth escapes  the  history  of  Australian  discovery  abounds. 
Not  without  danger  were  the  expeditious  of  Sir  Thomas 
Mitchell  in  1831,  1835,  and  1836,  when,  following  up  the 
discoveries  of  Sturt,  he  explored  the  beautiful  country,  now 
included  in  Victoria,  to  which  he  gave  the  name  of  Australia 
Felix.  But  there  w^as  greater  danger  in  some  of  the  minor 
enterprises  of  travellers  in  more  distant  parts  of  the  island, 
as  in  the  journeys  undertaken  by  Lieutenant  Grey — who, 
as  Sir  George  Grey,  was  afterwards  Governor  of  South 
Australia,  of  New  Zealand,  and  of  Cape  Colony — in 
Western  Australia,  and  especially  its  north-w^estern  parts, 
betw^een  1837  and  1840,  by  which  were  opened  up  some 
splendid  regions,  of  which  little  use  has  yet  been  made. 

Another  bold  Australian  explorer,  afterwards  famous  for  his 
connection,  as  governor  of  Jamaica,  with  the  so-called  insur- 
rection of  1865,  was  Edward  John  Eyre.  Having  made 
some  researches  around  the  new  settlement  at  Adelaide  iu 

*  Woods,  '  History  of  Discovery  and  Exploration  in  Australia,'  vol.  i., 
pp.  362,  363. 


i    U:  ! 


"^ ' 


STRALIA. 


Australia,'  vol.  i., 


STURTS  AND  EYRE'S  EXPEDITIONS. 


309 


1839,  ho  set  out  next  year  on  a  more  darinf:;  expedition. 
Attended  by  only  five  men  and  two  boys,  and  travelling  due 
north  in  searcli  of  the  supposed  inland  sea,  lie  went  nuicli 
fiU'tlier  than  any  previous  traveller  had  done,  and  examined 
the  nei^'hbourhood  of  Lake  Torrens.  Mucli  fartlier  into  tlio 
unknown  north  he  dared  not  ^'o.  After  bein^^  twice  for 
many  days  without  water,  and  seeing  around  him  nothing 
but  monotonous  dangers,  before  him  no  passage  to  anytliing 
but  death,  he  abandoned  the  attempt  to  ])ush  on  to  tlio 
northern  shore  of  the  island,  and  retraced  his  steps.  r)ut 
then,  not  disheartened,  he  turned  rour.d  and,  with  one 
white  and  three  black  companions,  traversed  the  dreary 
southern  coast-land,  past  the  Australian  Bight,  from  Port 
Lincoln  to  King  George's  Sound.  Here  peril  succeeded 
peril,  and  horror  was  heaped  on  horror. 

On  the  25th  of  March,  1841,  after  three  months'  journey, 
Eyre  had  only  reached  the  head  of  the  Bight.  He  was 
still  six  hundred  and  fifty  miles  from  King  George's 
Sound,  and  ho  had  but  three  weeks'  provisions  in  store. 
'The  overseer,'  says  the  historian,  'begged  Mr.  Eyre  to 
return,  but  he  would  not.  Yet  he  was  suffering  perhaps 
more  than  the  others ;  he  was  very  ill  from  living  upon 
some  unwholesome  fish  they  had  caught,  and  his  chances  of 
life  seemed  very  small  if  he  persisted  in  his  undertaking. 
But  go  on  he  would.  He  consented  to  kill  a  horse  for  food; 
it  was  one  which  was  so  ill  that  his  life  could  not  be  saved 
in  any  case,  and  the  consequence  of  such  unwholesome  diet 
was  that  they  were  all  ill  again.  Bad  as  it  was,  the  native 
boys  thought  they  had  not  had  enough  of  it,  so  during  the 
night  they  stole  a  large  quantity.  Mr.  Eyre  detected  the 
act  of  dishonesty,  and,  to  punish  the  two  eldest  of  them, 
deducted  a  third  portion  of  their  usual  share  of  rations. 
They  resented  this  by  leaving  the  party,  and  endeavouring 
to  make  their  way  by  themselves  ;  but  as  they  had  been 
very  much  disaffected  ever  since  the  rations  were  reduced. 
Eyre  was  not  surprised  at  their  conduct.  Tlie  last  sheep 
was  now  killed,  as  a  preparation  for  another  journey.     The 


•^^ 


wm 


w^ 


It. 


I' 


: 

i  ■  ! 

1 

! '  \ 

i 

■ . 

; 
1  - 

.  *  * 

'""'ft 

■' J' 
■2' 


it:'       l\ 


I    1 


310    WEST  AUSTRALIA  AND  WASTE  AUSTRALIA. 

ovorflccr  then  went  to  examine  the  country  in  advance.    The 
news  broiif^lit  back  was  not  cncourar^ing ;  the  road  lay  aloiij,' 
even  more  thick  and  scrubby  land  than  before.     It  seemed 
threatening  rain,  so  the  start  was  delayed.     Anxiously  tlioy 
watched  eacii  darkening  cloud,  praying  earnestly  for  sonio 
few  drops  of  wa'cr;  but  the  clouds  cleared  off,  and  tlio 
night  was  clear  and  cold.     Just  as  they  were  turning  in  for 
the  evening  the  native  boys  came  back  ;  tliey  could  not  exist 
upon  tlieir  own  resources,  and  were  sadly  famished  beforo 
they  submitted  to  the  humiliation  of  returning.     Eyre  took 
them  back,  believing  them  to  be  sincere,  and  little  suspected 
the  treachery  they  meditated.     Again,  on  the  26th  and  27tli, 
it  seemed  wild  and  stormy,  and  threatening  rain,  but  none 
fell.     On  the  latter  date  they  started,  again  leaving  behind 
them  everything  except  the  provisions,  their  arms,  ammuni- 
tion, and  clothes.     They  only  advanced  fifteen  miles  the 
first  day.     The  next  stage  was,  however,  eighteen,  through 
a  thick  scrub,  and  along  the  top  of  the  limestone  cliffs  which 
had  reappeared,  but  were  now  not  more  than  300  feet  high. 
On  the  29th  they  made  nineteen  miles  ;  but  the  day  was  so 
windy  that  they  could  scarcely  stagger  along  the  tops  of 
the  cliffs.     In  the  evening  the  horses  were  all  hobbled,  and 
turned  out  to  feed,  and  the  stores  were  piled  under  an 
oilskin,  while  everyone  was  obliged  to  make  break- winds  of 
boughs  to  protect  them  during  the  night.     Mr.  Eyre  on  this 
eventful  evening  took  the  first  watch,  from  six  to  eleven. 
The  night  was  bitterly  <  jld,  and  the  wind  was  blowing  hard 
from  the  south-west.     The  horses  fed  well,  but  rambled  a 
good  deal.     At  half-past  ten  Mr.  Eyre  went  to  fetch  them 
back.     He  found  them  at  a  short  distance,  and  was  picking 
his  way,  in  the  dark,  among  the  bushes,  when   he   was 
suddenly  startled  by  a  gunshot.     It  was  from  the  camp,  and 
of  course  he  hurried  there  immediately.     About  one  hundred 
yards  from  it  he  met  Wylie,  the  King  George's  Sound  native, 
running  and  crying  out,  "  Oh,   massa  !  oh,  massa  !  come, 
look  here  !"     He  reached  the  camp,  and  there  before  him 
lay  his  overseer  in  the  agonies  of  death,  with  a  wound  in  his 


i '  it 


m\ 


AN  EXPLORER'S  TROUBLES, 


3H 


chest,  from  which  the  blood  was  flowing  rapidly.     A  glanco 
around  explained  the  "''hole  scene.  The  two  younger  natives 
were  gone,  whilst  the  scattered  fragments  of  the  baggage 
which  had  been  piled  under  the  oilskin  told  the  reason  why. 
The  overseer  was  beyond  human  aid,  for  he  expired  imme- 
diately after  Eyre's  arrival.     It  was  a  horrible  scene,  and 
the  feelings  of  the  survivor  wore  shocked  as  well  by  the 
crushing  weight  of  the  disaster  as  by  its  suddenness.     Eyre 
describes  it  with  a  reality  that  none  but  a  witness  could  do 
justice  to.    He  says  :  "  The  horrors  of  my  situation  glanced 
upon  me.  1  was  alone  in  the  desert.  The  frightful,  appalling 
truth  glared  upon  me  in  such  startling  reahty  as  almost  to 
paralyze  my  mind.     At  the  dead  hour  of  night,  with  the 
fierce  wind  raging  around  me,  in  one  of  the  most  inhospit- 
able wastes  of  Australia,  I  was  left  alone  with  one  native 
boy.     I  could  not  rely  upon  his  fidelity,  for  he  was  perhaps 
in  league  with  the  other  two,  who  might  be  waiting  to  kill 
me.     Three  days  had  passed  since  we  had  found  water,  and 
it  was  very  doubtful  when  we  should  find  more.     Six  hun- 
dred miles  of  country  had  to  be  traversed  before  I  could  hope 
to  obtain  the  slightest  help  or  assistance,  whilst  I  knew  that 
not  a  drop  of  water  nor  an  ounce  of  flour  had  been  left  by 
the  murderers."    The  guns  were  gone,  and  only  a  rifle  and 
a  pair  of  pistols  left.     The  former  was  useless,  as  a  ball  was 
jammed  in  the  barrel ;  and  the  latter  had  no  cartridges  to 
fit  them.     Obtaining  possession  of  all  the  remaining  arms, 
useless  as  they  were,  he  went  with  the  native  to  look  for  the 
horses.     After  a  long  search  he  found  them,  and  when  he 
brought  them  back  to  the  camp  he  sat  down  to  watch.     He 
passed  a  bitter  night.     Every  moment,  he  tells  us,  seemed 
to  him  an  age,  and  he  thought  the  morning  would  never 
come.     The  night  was  frosty.     He  had  nothing  on  but  a 
shirt  and  trousers,  and  to  mental  anguish  was  now  added 
intense  bodily  pain.     He  tells  us  that  suffering  and  distress 
nearly  overwhelmed  him,  and  life  seemed  scarcely  worth  tlie 
efibrt  to  prolong  it.**    But  hope  came  in  the  morning.     A 

*  Woods,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  19-21, 


;;     i! 


ini 


Hi!  i 


:i 


i* 


iiii:  I 


312    WEST  AUSTRALIA  AND  WASTE  AUSTRALIA. 

small  quantity  of  food  was  found,  and  one  of  the  horses 
served  for  more,  till,  after  slow  travelling  and  frequent 
resting,  Eyre  and  his  single  companion  reached  a  district  in 
which  kangaroos  and  fish  were  to  be  procured.  Two 
months  of  further  travel  brought  them  to  their  destination, 
where  succour  awaited  them ;  and  they  were  taken  back 
to  Adelaide,  there  to  learn  that  they  had  long  before  been 
given  up  as  dead. 

That  journey,  one  of  the  least  profitable  in  the  long  list 
of  Australian  travels,  was  one  of  the  most  perilous.  Dr. 
Leichhardt's  important  expedition  of  1844  and  1845,  in  a 
different  quarter,  was  more  useful  and  less  dangerous. 
Starting  from  Sydney,  he  went  overland  to  Port  Essingtou, 
and  was  thus  the  first  to  explore  some  ot  the  finest  parts  of 
Queensland,  and,  after  passing  the  borders  of  the  Gulf  of 
Carpentaria,  discovered  the  well-watered  plains  of  North 
Australia.  In  the  course  of  fifteen  months  he  conducted  a 
party  of  ten  men,  save  one  who  died  on  the  way,  over 
more  than  three  thousand  miles  of  ground,  most  of  it  never 
before  trodden  by  Englishmen. 

In  the  meanwhile  Captain  Sturt,  who  had  chiefly  en- 
coiiiaged  all  this  enterprise,  was  not  idle.  Still  in  search  of 
the  great  inland  sea,  he  started  op  a  third  expedition  in 
1844,  and  wandered  about  in  the  interior,  until,  forced  to 
abandon  his  old  theory,  he  was  induced  to  adopt  a  new  one, 
and  to  believe  that  the  centre  of  the  island  was  a  huge, 
impassable  desert.  A  desert  certainly  he  found,  though  he 
exaggerated  its  extent.  During  six  rainless  months  he  was 
detained  in  a  region  where,  says  John  M'Douall  Stuart,  the 
most  notable  of  his  sixteen  comrades,  '  the  heat  of  the  sun 
was  so  intense  that  every  screw  in  their  boxes  was  drawn, 
and  all  horn  handles  and  combs  split  into  fine  laminae  ;  the 
lead  dropped  from  their  pencils,  their  finger-nails  became  as 
brittle  as  glass,  and  their  hair,  and  the  wool  on  their  sheep, 
ceased  to  grow.'* 

*  Hardman,  *  Explorations  in  Australia  :  the  Journals  of  John  M'Douall 
Stuart.' 


Fohn  M'Douall 


STURT  AGAIN,  AND  STUART. 


;i3 


For  more  than  a  dozen  years  after  his  return  to  Adelaide 
in  1846,  where  he  had  nothing  but  fruitless  discoveries  and 
dismal  adventures  to  report,  Captain  Sturt'snew  supposition 
of  a  vast  inland  desert  was  adopted  by  the  colonists ;  or,  if 
disputed,  no  attempt  was  made  to  disprove  it.  Throughout 
thc",o  dozen  years  there  was  plenty  of  fresh  exploration,  but 
it  was  chiefly  along  the  coast  or  not  far  inland,  the  most 
important  being  a  series  of  expeditions  by  which  the 
northern  districts  were  visited  both  from  Sydney  in  the  far 
east,  and  from  Perth  in  the  far  west. 

But  in  1858  a  spirit  of  bolder  enterprise  was  revived.  Its 
leader  was  Sturt's  former  comrade,  Stuart,  who  used  his 
old  experience  in  making  no  less  than  six  expeditions  into 
the  interior  between  1858  and  1862.  In  each  of  the  six  he 
was  able  to  gather  much  fresh  geographical  information. 
The  first  expedition,  in  which  he  was  attended  only  by  one 
white  man,  and  a  native  who  soon  ran  away,  was  to  Lake 
Torrens  and  its  neighbourhood,  and  two  other  visits  were 
paid  to  it  by  him  in  1859.  The  result  was  his  discovery 
that  this  district,  always  before  a  source  of  confusion  to 
travellers,  some  of  whom  described  it  as  a  lake,  others  as  a 
desert,  is  both,  though  of  much  smaller  extent  than  had 
been  supposed.  The  winter  rains,  filling  the  surrounding 
channels,  turn  it  into  a  shallow  lake.  The  summer  drought 
turns  it  into  an  arid  desert.  This,  indeed,  is  the  character 
of  much  of  the  interior  of  Australia,  as  was  further  proved 
to  Stuart  by  his  fourth  expedition,  undertaken  in  1860, 
when  he  proceeded  to  the  very  middle  of  the  island,  and 
reached  the  point  named  after  him  Central  Mount  Stuart. 

In  1861  Stuart  left  Adelaide  again,  intending  in  this 
journey  to  go  right  across  the  continent.  He  failed  at  first . 
Au  impenetrable  forest  of  scrub  blocked  the  route  he  had 
proposed  to  take,  and  he  was  forced  to  go  home  for  fresh 
supplies.  Next  year  he  was  more  fortunate.  Leaving 
Adelaide  in  January,  1862,  he  made  a  clear  passage  from 
south  to  north,  reaching  the  mouth  of  the  Eiver  Adelaide, 
on  the  Indian  Ocean,  in  July,  and  there  finding  a  district 


ifS 

IW 

m  \ 

■  ■ 

1 

' 

'\'    1 ; 

i 

■ 

i 

■ 

1 

'!'    '\ 

f  ] 


h: 


314    WEST  AUSTRALIA  AND  WASTE  AUSTRALIA, 

which  he  highly  commended  as  the  site  for  a  new  colony. 
'  Judging  from  the  experience  I  have  had  in  travelling 
tlirough  the  continent  of  Australia  for  the  last  twenty-two 
years,'  he  said,  '  and  also  from  the  description  that  other 
explorers  have  given  of  the  different  portions  they  have 
examined  in  their  journeys,  I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying 
that  the  country  that  I  have  discovered  on  and  around  tlie 
banks  of  the  Adelaide  Kiver  is  more  favourable  than  any 
other  part  of  tlio  continent  for  the  formation  of  a  now 
colony.  The  soil  is  generally  of  the  richest  nature  ever 
formed  for  the  benefit  of  mankind ;  black  and  alluvial,  and 
capable  of  producing  anything  that  could  be  desired,  and 
watered  by  one  of  the  finest  rivers  in  Australia.  This  river 
was  found  by  Lieutenant  Helpman  to  be  about  four  to  seven 
fathoms  deep  at  the  mouth,  and  at  one  hundred  and  twt  y 
miles  up  (the  farthest  point  he  reached)  to  be  about  seven 
fathoms  deep  and  nearly  one  hundred  yards  broad,  with  a 
clear  passage  all  the  way  ap.  I  struck  it  about  this  point, 
and  followed  it  down,  encamping  fifteen  miles  from  its 
mouth,  and  found  the  water  perfectly  fresh,  and  the  river 
broader  and  apparently  very  deep  ;  the  country  around 
most  excellent,  abundantly  supplied  with  fresh  water, 
running  in  many  flowing  streams  into  the  Adelaide  Eiver, 
the  grass  in  many  places  growing  six  feet  high,  and  the 
herbage  very  close — a  thing  seldom  seen  in  a  new  country. 
The  timber  is  chiefly  composed  of  stringy -bark,  gum,  niyali, 
casurina,  pine,  and  many  other  descriptions  of  large  timber, 
all  of  which  will  be  most  useful  to  new  colonists.  Tliere  is 
also  a  plentiful  supply  of  stone  in  the  low  rises  suitable  for 
building  purposes,  and  any  quantity  of  bamboo  can  be  ob- 
tained from  the  river  from  two  to  fifty  feet  long.  I  measured 
one  fifteen  inches  in  circumference,  and  saw  many  larger. 
The  river  abounds  in  fish  and  water-fowl  of  all  descriptions. 
On  my  arrival  from  the  coast  I  kept  more  to  the  eastward 
of  my  north  course,  with  the  intention  of  seeing  farther 
into  the  country.  I  crossed  the  sources  of  the  running 
streams  before  alluded  to,  and  had  great  difficulty  in  getting 


ITRALIA. 


A  SITE  FOR  A  NEW  COLONY. 


315 


•? 


more  to  the  west.  They  take  their  rise  from  large  bodies 
of  springs  coming  from  extensive  grassy  plains,  which 
proves  there  must  be  a  very  considerable  underground 
drainage,  as  there  are  no  hills  of  suflicicnt  ehvation  to 
cause  the  supply  of  water  in  the  streams.  I  feel  confident 
that,  if  a  new  settlement  is  formed  in  this  splendid  country, 
in  a  few  years  it  will  become  one  of  the  brightest  gems  in 
the  British  crown.  To  South  Australia,  and  some  of  the 
more  remote  Australian  colonies,  the  benefits  to  be  derived 
from  the  formation  of  such  a  colony  would  be  equally 
advantageous,  creating  an  outlet  for  their  surplus  beef  and 
mutton,  which  would  be  eagerly  consumed  by  the  races  in 
the  Indian  Islands,  and  payment  made  by  the  shipment  of 
their  useful  products.  Indeed,  I  see  one  of  the  finest  open- 
ings I  am  aware  of  for  trading  between  these  islands  and  a 
colony  formed  where  I  propose.'* 

Stuart,  however,  who  died  in  1866,  was  not  the  first 
Englishman  who  succeeded  in  traversing  the  Australian 
continent.  While  he  was  preparing  for  his  journey  from 
Adelaide,  another  expedition,  disastrous  in  everything  but 
the  one  object  for  which  it  was  undertaken,  was  being  fitted 
out  at  Melbourne.  Its  history  forms  the  most  affecting 
episode  in  all  the  annals  of  Australian  discovery. 

A  party  of  seventeen,  from  whom  three  soon  deserted, 
left  Melbourne  on  the  20th  of  August,  1860,  under  the 
leadership  of  Eobert  O'Hara  Burke,  and  with  William  John 
Wills  as  second  in  command.  They  proceeded  in  an  almost 
straight  line  to  the  north,  turning  aside  to  make  small 
excursions  on  the  road,  and  reached  Cooper's  Creek,  a  post 
just  half-way  between  the  northern  and  southern  coasts  of 
Austraha,  on  the  11th  of  November.  There  they  halted 
for  a  month,  waiting  for  fresh  supplies,  which  had  been 
ordered  to  follow  from  Melbourne.  At  length,  on  the  11th 
of  December,  tired  of  waiting  any  longer,  Burke  resolved  to 
leave  the  <rvf>ntor  pait  of  his  company  at  Cooper's  Creek, 
and  to  peitunii  the  rest  of  the  journey  with  Wills  and  two 

••'  Ilardman. 


!         < 


I  11" 


\H 


w 


■A 


h, 


Di 


31 

I 


f 'i 


1 

,_ 

i;; 

i  1 

i ,; 

■1', 
■J 

h 

i      : 

'i 

i 

1 

k 

t 

3i5    WEST  AUSTRALIA  AND  WASTE  AUSTRALIA. 

men,  named  Gray  and  King,  for  his  only  companions.  The 
travelling  was  dangerous,  and  numerous  difficulties  had  to 
be  overcome  ;  but  the  brave  men  did  overcomr  them,  and 
on  the  10th  of  February,  1861,  they  reached  the  Gulf  of 
Carpentaria. 

Thus  far  they  were  fortunate,  but  no  farther.  The  return 
journey  was  utterly  wearisome.  Gray  died  on  the  road, 
and  his  comrades  were  almost  too  weak  to  bury  him.  Tired 
ahnost  to  death,  they  slowly  worked  their  way  back  to 
Cooper's  Creek.  They  reached  it  on  the  21st  of  April,  and, 
to  their  dismay,  found  the  station  deserted.  The  men  left 
in  it  had  stayed  there  four  months.  On  the  very  morning 
of  the  21st,  only  a  few  hours  before  Burke,  Wills,  and  King 
came  up,  they  had  gone  homewards,  believing  that  the 
others  must  have  been  lost.  Had  the  three  hastened  on 
the  road  to  the  south  they  might  have  overtaken  them. 
But  they  did  not  know  that  the  chance  of  safety  was  so 
near.  So  they  rested  for  a  day  at  Cooper's  Creek,  and  then 
crawled  in  an  easterly  direction.  For  eight  weeks  they 
wandered  about,  making  friends  of  the  few  natives  whom 
they  met,  and  with  their  help  picking  up  a  scanty  supply  of 
food.  But  such  dreary  hopeless  life  could  not  last  long. 
They  grew  weaker  and  sadder  every  day.  '  I  feel  weaker 
than  ever,'  wrote  Wills,  in  his  note-book,  on  the  21st  of 
June,  when  they  had  got  back  to  Cooper's  Creek,  '  and  can 
scarcely  crawl  out  of  the  mia-mia.  Unless  relief  comes  in 
some  form  or  other  I  cannot  possibly  last  more  than  a 
fortnight.  Had  we  come  to  grief  elsewhere,  we  could  only 
have  blamed  ourselves ;  but  here  we  are  returned  to  Cooper's 
Creek,  where  we  had  every  right  to  look  for  provisions  and 
clothing,  and  yet  we  have  to  die  of  starvation.'  Provisions 
and  clothing  had  not  been  left  for  them,  as  they  should  have 
been  ;  but,  strange  to  say,  the  relieving  party  they  had 
expected  seven  months  before  had  come  up  in  their  absence, 
had  looked  about  for  them  in  a  careless  way,  and  finding  no 
trace  of  their  whereabouts,  or  even  of  their  existence,  had 
gone  home  again.     Thus,  a  second  time,  cruel  misfortune 


ii 


"1'.: 


BURKE  AND  WILLS. 


317 


stood  in  the  way  of  their  preservation.  Beheving  themselves 
altogether  deserted,  they  resolved  on  one  last  search  for 
some  stray  blacks  who  might  help  them.  Wills  was  too  ill 
to  move,  however,  and  at  his  earnest  request,  and  in  the 
assurance  that  herein  was  their  only  hope,  Burke  and  King 
left  him  on  the  27th  of  June,  with  a  little  heap  of  the  best 
food  the  woods  could  yield.  '  I  think  to  live  about  four  or 
five  days,'  he  wrote  in  the  note-book  that  he  thought  might 
possibly  some  day  reach  his  father.  He  died  on  the  29th. 
Burke  seems  to  have  lived  only  a  day  longer.  He  was  not 
strong  enough  to  walk  on  as  he  had  intended.  After  tv  o 
days  of  painful  travelling,  he  too  had  to  lie  down  and  die. 
'  I  hope,'  he  said  to  King,  '  you  will  remain  with  me  here 
till  I  am  quite  dead.  It's  a  comfort  to  know  that  some  one 
is  by.  But  leave  me  unburied  as  I  lie.'  King  liad  not  long 
to  wait.  His  companion  died  next  morning.  He,  however, 
was  strong  enough  to  fight  through  the  terrible  battle  with 
hunger  and  fatigue.  He  went  back  to  the  Creek,  buried 
Wilis's  body  in  the  sand,  loitered  in  the  neighbourhood  for 
some  days,  was  taken  prisoner  by  a  tribe  of  natives,  who 
fed  him  and  used  him  kindly,  and  at  last  he  was  found  by 
a  relief  party  sent  from  Melbourne  in  search  of  the  missing 
heroes. 

More  than  one  relief  party  was  so  sent ;  and  the  latest 
explorations  in  the  interior  of  Australia  grew  out  of  the 
efforts — successful  when  it  was  too  late  to  do  more  than 
take  back  their  bones  for  sumptuous  burial  in  Melbourne — 
to  discover  the  fate  of  these  brave  men  and  grievous  sufferers. 
In  connection  with  this  later  work  the  names  of  Alfred 
William  Howitt,  of  John  M'Kinlay,  of  William  Landsborough, 
and  of  Frederick  Walker,  must  be  held  in  honourable  re- 
membrance. But  it  is  not  necessary  here  to  detail  their 
exploits,  or  those  of  John  and  Alexander  Forrest,  and  many 
more  heroic  travellers,  during  the  next  quarter  of  a  century. 
Much  of  this  work  has  been  of  commercial  as  well  as  of 
scientific  value,  notably  that  incidental  to  the  laying  down 
of  the  telegraph  from  Adelaide  to  Fort  Darwin  between  1870 


% 


m 


,  I:' 


M 


ii,;  i:  Jl 


318    WEST  AUSTRALIA  AND  WASTE  AUSTRALIA. 

aud  1872,  and  to  Alexander  Forrest's  opening  up  of  the 
luxuriant  Kimberley  district  in  the  northernmost  part  of  West 
Australia,  which  was  further  explored  by  Mr.  Stockdale  in 
1884.  After  all,  however,  we  still  have  very  incomplete  in- 
formation concerning  the  great  x\ustralian  interior.  '  What 
we  know  of  this  vast  continent,'  it  may  even  now  be  said,  as 
it  was  said  by  the  historian  in  1868,  '  does  not  go  much 
beyond  an  acquaintance  with  the  coast.  One  has  only  to 
look  at  the  map  to  be  convinced  that  we  have  as  yet  only 
obtained  a  very  small  glance  into  the  interior.  A  little  to 
the  west  of  Central  Mount  Stuart  an  immense  blank  occurs ; 
and  for  twelve  and  a  half  degrees  of  latitude  and  longitude 
there  is  scarcely  a  mark  to  tell  us  what  is  contained  therein. 
There  are  two  small  tracts  on  the  edges,  but,  with  these  ex- 
ceptions, nothing  whatever  is  known  of  a  tract  of  country 
nearly  half  a  million  square  miles  in  area.  Mr.  A.  Gregory 
described  the  north  side  of  it  as  a  desert.  His  brother 
characterized  the  north-west  side  in  the  same  manner. 
Stuart,  on  the  west  side,  was  encountered  by  large  tracts  of 
spinifex  grass  and  stately  gum-trees,  apparently  liable  to 
occasional  floods.  Eyre,  on  the  south  side,  and  the  ex- 
plorers on  the  west,  have  been  baffled  by  the  same  desert. 
It  is,  in  fact,  a  sandy  table-land,  elevated  on  the  west  side, 
about  three  thousand  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  and 
sloping  down  towards  Lake  Torrens,  which  is  very  little,  if 
at  all,  raised  above  the  surface  of  the  ocean.  From  Lake 
Torrens  and  Lake  Eyre  it  appears  to  rise  again,  first  in  a 
range,  and  then  in  a  series  of  terraces.  This  elevation  ter- 
minates at  last  in  the  high,  rugged  Cordillera  of  the  eastern 
coast.  We  may,  therefore,  regard  the  continent  as  tilted  up 
on  each  side,  and  depressed  in  the  centre  to  a  kind  of  trough. 
The  Gulf  of  Carpentaria  would  represent  the  northern 
portion,  and  the  deep  indented  part  of  Spencer's  Gulf  the 
Bouthern.  Since,  however,  the  northern  coast  is  also  tilted 
up,  the  trough  or  depression  does  not  extend  through  the 
continent.  It  is  a  series  of  salt  lakes,  sand  drifts,  and  stony 
deserts.    A  great  portion  of  it  is  redeemed  by  the  fact  that 


T'. 


THE  GREAT  INTERIOR. 


319 


it  receives  so  much  drainage  from  the  Ccast  by  the  various 
channels  of  the  Barcoo,  and  from  the  west  by  waters  which 
burst  out  in  the  form  of  immense  thermal  springs.  The  ex- 
tent and  number  of  the  latter  is  almost  incredible,  and  the 
depth  from  which  they  come  is  manifested  by  the  great  heat 
of  their  waters.  Nothing  coald  more  clearly  show  the 
character  of  the  central  depression,  and  the  slow  rate  at 
which  the  table-land  sinks  down  towards  it,  than  the  exis- 
tence of  these  springs.  Of  the  Sandy  Desert,  the  greater 
portion  is  thickly  covered  with  spinifex  grass  ;  but  there  are 
drifts  of  sand,  with  no  vegetation  whatever  upon  them,  ex- 
tending for  several  miles.  This  is  probably  drifted  up  into 
masses  after  the  decomposition  of  the  ferruginous  sandstone. 
The  siliceous  fragments  left  behind  form  those  shingle  plains 
known  as  the  Stony  Desert ;  they  exist  over  a  far  greater 
tract  than  that  marked  in  the  old  maps  of  Australia  as  ex- 
tending like  an  arm  northwards  from  Lake  Torrens.  It  would 
seem  as  if  the  decomposition  of  the  rock  here  was  owing  in 
some  measure  to  pressure,  when  the  table-land  on  either 
side  was  uplifted.  Thus  we  see  that,  after  all  the  explora- 
tions have  been  made,  we  have  adopted,  with  modification, 
the  theory  of  the  earlier  colonists.  It  was  thought  in  Oxley's 
time  that  the  interior  rivers  must  flow  towards  a  central 
depression,  and  there  form  a  kind  of  inland  sea.  Long  after 
the  abandonment  of  this  theory  we  find  it  to  be  true,  to  a 
certain  extent,  and  it  is  realized  in  Lake  Eyre,  the  extent 
of  which  is  as  yet  undetermined.  The  inland  lake  theory 
was  abandoned,  after  Stuart's  discoveries,  in  favour  of  a 
central  desert.  This,  it  appears,  is  also  true  in  a  modified 
sense.* 

*  Woods,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  509-513.  Besides  Mr.  Woods's  very  valuable 
'History  of  the  Discovery  and  Exploration  of  Australia,'  there  is  a  hardly 
less  interesting  '  History  of  Discovery  in  Australia,  Tasmania,  and  New 
Zealand,'  by  Mr.  William  Howitt.  Among  the  many  personal  records  of 
travel  and  adventure,  Mr.  William  Wills's  account  of  his  sou's  noble  and 
melancholy  history,  entitled  'A  Successful  Exploration  through  the 
Interior  of  Australia,'  ia  especially  noteworthy. 


1,  i\ 
'r.\ 


■^*.w.':Mi;. 


1,  i 


I'M 


H 


l!i: 


r,  I 


:    I'' 

m 


■  T 


i  i! 


i :, 


'■'ti 

i 


i  i 

J  !■, 

,  I 

■   1 

1  , 

1    ; 

CHAPTER  XXVIII. 


PAKEHA    NEW    ZEALAND. 

THR  NEW  ZEALAND  ISLANDS  AND  THEIR  INHABITANTS — FIRST  INTERCOURSK 
WITH  ENGLISHMEN — THE  MASSACRE  OF  THE  CREW  AND  PASSENGERS  OP 
THE  'BOVD'  in  1809 — THE  MISSIONARIES  AND  THEIR  WORK — THE  PAKEHA 
TRADERS— ARTICLES  OF  TRADE — TRAFFIC  IN  HUMAN  HEADS — OTHER  DE- 
BASING EMPLOYMENTS  OF  THE  PAKEHAS — PROGRESS  OF  ENGLISH  INFLUENCES 
—SPREAD  OF  CIVILIZATION — THE  CHARACTER  OF  THE  MAORIS.  [1809- 
1839.] 


I«.=^jii«^l  HE  three  islands  known  as  the  North,  the  South, 
^^  ^M,  ^^^^  Stewart's  Islands,  and  formerly  as  New 
ri^  IflJl  Ulster,  New  Munster,  and  New  Lemster,  which, 
with  a  number  of  smaller  islands,  make  up  the 
colony  of  New  Zealand,  have  an  area  of  106,200 
square  miles,  being  rather  less  than  the  dimensions  of  Great 
Britain  and  Ireland.  The  middle,  called  the  South  Island, 
occupies  rather  more  than  half  of  the  whole  ;  the  northern 
island  is  somewhat  smaller ;  the  southernmost  island,  much 
less  in  size,  is  little  more  than  a  barren  rock,  about  half  aa 
large  as  Yorkshire.  The  group  dift'ers  widely — in  clnnate, 
in  scenery,  and  in  the  character  of  its  inhabitants — from 
Australia  and  Tasmania.  The  aborigines  of  all  three 
sections  of  Australasia  were  probably  of  the  same  stock ; 
but  in  New  Zealand,  in  or  near  the  fifteenth  century,  they 
were  exterminated  or  absorbed  by  what  appears  to  have 
been  a  bolder  Malayan  race,  which  crossed  over  in  canoes 
from  the  Polynesian  region,  and  formed  the  Maori  nation. 


ST  INTERCOUUSK 
PASSKNGKUS  OF 
IK — THE  PAKEHA 
iUS — OTHER  DE- 
LISH  INFLUENCES 
MAORIS.      [1809- 


-Vorfh  1'4tif   1 7^ 


liTWURT 
ISLtNC 


,i.-7~  '\ytvrtAua  guj  - 


170     Long  E.  172  of  Grepu.    174 


1  ■ 

■ 

1 , 

11 

.1  ' 

1 1 ;: 

f 

i 

1 

tl^llij 


,:.  1 


ni 


m 

la  ii 


JOHN    HOOO,    13   PATERNOSTER    ROW,    H)NI)ON. 


iMl|p 


•ir 


n, 


Di 


i 


■i 


>\  I' 


i 


fill 


i. 


.1 


EARLY  DEALINGS  WITH  THE  MAORIS. 


321 


Tho  adventures  of  Captain  Cook  and  other  early  voyagers 
among  tho  Maoris  have  already  been  referred  to.  Subse- 
quent navigators  carried  on  tho  irregular  intercourse,  and 
in  some  instances  tolerably  friendly  relations  w(!ro  es- 
tablished between  the  natives  and  their  visitors.  Whaling 
and  other  ships  from  New  South  Wales  halted  frequently 
in  the  New  Zealand  ports ;  and  now  and  then  some  of  the 
natives  went  back  in  these  ships  to  see  for  themselves  the 
strange  novelties  of  civilized  life  in  Sydney.  Among  others, 
wo  are  told, '  a  powerful  chief  named  Tippaheo,  accompanied 
by  his  five  sons,  came  to  Port  Jackson,  and,  on  seeing  tho 
different  arts  and  manufactures  carried  on  by  the  settlers, 
was  so  affected  by  the  conviction  thus  forced  upon  him  of 
tho  barbarous  state  of  ignorance  in  which  his  own  country 
was  shrouded  that  he  burst  into  tears  and  exclaimed,  in 
the  bitterness  of  his  heart,  "New  Zealand  no  good!"'* 
When  Tippahee  returned  to  his  island  home,  which  was  in 
the  extreme  north  of  Nevv  Ulster,  styled  the  Bay  of  Islands, 
at  which  the  English  vessels  generally  touched,  he  took 
with  him  a  young  Englishi.ian  named  George  Bruce. 
Bruce,  the  first  European  resident  in  New  Zealand,  married 
a  native  wife,  and  lived  happily  among  her  kindred  for  many 
years,  doing  much,  it  would  seem,  to  prepare  for  the  closer 
relations  that  were  soon  to  spring  up  between  the  two  races. 

These  relations  were  from  the  first  marked  by  some  ugly 
incidents.  In  December,  1809,  a  trading-ship,  the  Boyd, 
with  seventy  persons  on  board,  left  Sydney  for  England, 
and,  as  she  intended  to  go  round  by  New  Zealand,  and 
there  call  for  some  spars  to  be  sold  at  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope,  the  captain  consented  to  take  with  him  four  or  five 
natives  of  Whangaroa  who  were  anxious  to  return  home. 
On  the  passage  some  extra  work  had  to  be  done,  and  the 
captain  ordered  the  New  Zealanders  to  share  it  with  the 
sailors.  One  of  them,  known  as  George,  refused  on  the 
plea  that  he  was  ill,  and  that,  he  being  a  chief's  son,  the 
labour  was  degrading  to  his  rank.     '  The  captain,'  it  is 

*  Martin,  vol.  iii.,  p.  118. 

21 


i  * 


•4.1 


322 


PAKEHA  NEW  ZEALAND. 


;   i 


In 
Mil 


recorded,  '  treated  both  representations  with  ridicule,  and 
had  him  twice  tied  up  to  the  gangway  and  severely  flogrjcd, 
at  the  same  time  lessening  his  allowance  of  food.     In  reply 
to  the   taunting   assertion   that  he  was  no   chief,  George 
merely  remarked  that  they  would  find  him  to  be  such  on 
their  arrival  in  his  country ;  and  so  well  did  he  disguise  the 
revengeful  passions  excited  by  the  treatment  he  had  received 
as  to  persuade  the  captain  to  put  in  at  Whangaroa,  where 
his  tribe  resided,  as  the  best  place  for  procuring  the  spars, 
although   it   was   not   known  that  the  harbour   had   ever 
before  been  visited  by  any  European  vessel.     On  arriving, 
the  crafty  savage  landed  alone,  and,  after  a  brief  interview 
with  some  of  his  tribe,  returned  to  the  ship  and  invited  the 
captain  to  come  on  shore  and  point  out  the  trees  that  would 
best  suit  his    purpose.      Three   boats    were    accordingly 
manned,  and  the  captain  landed  and  proceeded  with  his 
party  towards  a  wood.     They  had  no  sooner  e       "ed  it 
than  they  were  attacked  by  the  savages,  and  evCi.^  _.ie  of 
them  was  put  to  instant  death.     George  and  his  associates 
disguised  themselves  in  the  clothes  of  the  victims — it  being 
now  dark — and  went  off  in  the  boats  to  the  Boyd.    They 
got  on  board  by  a  stratagem,  and  then   slaughtered  in- 
discriminately every  man,  woman,  and    child,  excepting 
five  seamen,  who  had  escaped  to  the  shrouds,  a  woman  and 
two  children,  and  a  cabin-boy  whom  George  preserved  in 
gratitude  for  kindness  he  had  received  from  him  during  the 
voyage.     When  morning  dawned  upon  the  ill-fated  vessel, 
the  sailors  who  had  taken  refuge  in  the  rigging  still  main- 
tained their  dreary  watch,  until  Tippahee,  the  chief  who 
had  visited  New  South  Wales,  came  alongside  in  his  canoe, 
and,  informing  them  that  he  had  just  arrived  from  the  Bay 
of  Islands  to  trade  for  dried  fish,  offered  them  his  protection. 
The  men  descended,  entered  his  canoe,  and  were   safely 
landed  by  him,  although  closely  pursued  by  the  Whangaroa 
tribe.     But  on  shore  the  savages  soon  overtook  them,  and, 
forcibly  detaining  the  old  chief,  murdered  the  others  before 
his  face.    The  ship  was  thoroughly  ransacked,  the  muskets 


I  I 


'nl 


ridicule,  and 
jroly  flof,'^?Gd, 
)d.     In  reply 
jhief,  Georgo 
■y  bo  such  on 
E5  disguise  the 
3  had  received 
igaroa,  where 
ing  the  spars, 
3ur  had   ever 
On  arriving, 
)rief  interview 
,nd  invited  the 
ees  that  would 
e    accordingly 
seded  with  his 
ner  e       'ed  it 
d  evBi.^  -.16  of 
I  his  associates 
jtims— it  being 
Q  Boyd.    They 
laughtered  in- 
lild,  excepting 
,  a  woman  and 
e  preserved  iu 
him  during  the 
ill-fated  vessel, 
^iug  still  main- 
the  chief  who 
e  in  his  canoe, 
from  the  Bay 
his  protection. 
.d  were  safely 
ihe  Whangaroa 
look  them,  and, 
.e  others  before 
id,  the  muskets 


CIVILIZED  AND  UNCIVILIZED  BARDARI TIES.    323 

and  ammunition  being  deemed  invaluable.  The  fatlier  of 
(icorge,  eager  to  try  a  gun  of  which  ho  had  taken  posscKsion, 
burst  in  tho  head  of  a  cask  of  gunpowder,  tilled  tlio  pan, 
snapped  tlio  lock  over  tho  cask,  and  was  himself,  with 
thirteen  of  liis  companions,  blown  to  atoms.'* 

Thus  a  partial  retribution  fell  upon  tho  Whangaroa 
natives  for  their  barbarous  action.  It  must  be  remembered, 
however,  that  not  they  alone  were  guilty.  Tho  captain  of 
tho  Boijd  was  as  foolish,  and  with  less  excuse,  in  stirring 
up  tlio  evil  passions  of  tho  New  Zealanders  by  his  treatment 
of  the  chief's  son,  as  was  the  cliief  in  setting  lire  to  tlie 
powder  cask.  Englishmen,  accustomed  to  think  that  all 
inferior  races  may  be  treated  with  any  harshness  and  in- 
justice, sometimes  forget  that  a  single  spark  of  cruelty  may 
kindle  the  overpowering  wrath  of  a  whole  race  of  savages, 
and  that  they  lower  themselves  to  the  rank  of  those  savages 
when  they  vie  with  them  in  the  ferocity  of  the  punishment 
they  accord  to  wrong-doing  which  they  have  themselves 
provoked.  That  is  the  painful  and  humiliating  moral  of 
the  story  of  our  relations  with  New  Zealand. 

Many  mischiefs  sprang  from  this  disaster  of  the  Boyd. 
Tippahee,  who  had  done  all  he  could  in  aid  of  the  English, 
was  soon  afterwards  attacked  in  his  island-home  by  some 
whalers  who  supposed  that  he  was  the  author  of  tho 
massacre.  Many  of  his  subjects,  of  both  sexes  and  all 
ages,  were  murdered,  and  their  gardens  were  destroyed. 
He  himself  was  wounded ;  and  soon  afterwards  he  was 
killed  in  battle  with  the  Whangaroa  people,  who  resented 
the  small  part  ho  had  been  able  to  take  on  the  side  of  the 
English.  His  subjects,  formerly  friends  of  tho  English,  but 
now  their  enemies  with  good  reason,  next  murdered  some 
white  sailors  who  came  in  their  way.  And  so  the  dismal 
worlc  went  on. 

In  this  same  year,  however,  efforts  began  to  bo  made  for 
bringing  about  a  bettor  state  of  things.     Sanmel  Marsden,  a 
t.  ^gyman  in  New  South  Wales,  induced  tho  Church  Mis- 
*  Martin,  vol.  iii.,  pp.  118,  119. 

21—2 


t 


324 


PAKEHA  NEW  ZEALAND. 


sionary  Society  of  London  to  organize  a  machinery  for  the 
conversion  of  the  New  Zealanders,  urging  that  the  mis- 
sionaries sont  out  should  be  teachers  of  agriculture,  me- 
chanical arts,  and  other  branches  of  civilization,  as  well  as 
of  Christian  doctrine.     The  suggestion  was  adopted,  and  iu 
1814  the  first  missionaries  arrived  in  New  Zealand,  soon  to 
be  followed  by  others,  and  they  were  able  to  send  home 
flattering  reports  of  the  success  of  their  work.     They  made 
many  converts,  at  any  rate,  in  the  northern  districts,  to 
which  for  some  time  their  operations,  as  well  as  the  visits  of 
the  whalers  and  traders,  were  confined.     Some  tribes  re- 
sented their  interference,  and  regarded  their  appropriation 
of  lands  for  churches,  schools,  and  houses  as  the  beginning 
of  an  aggressive  movement  that  would  end  in  the  extinction 
of  all  native  rights  ;  and  the  stoutest  of  all  their  opponents, 
the  same  George  who  had  caused  the  massacre  of  the  crew 
and  passengers  of  the  Boijd,  proposed  to  exterminate  them, 
alleging  that  '  he  feared  that  the  introduction  of  Europeans 
would  eventually  lead  to  the  destracfcion  of  his  countrymen, 
or  that  they  would  be  reduced  to  the  miserable  condition  of 
the  Australian  aborigines,  whom  he  had  seen  lying  intoxi- 
cated in  the  streets  of  Sydney,  and  begging  their  food  from 
door  to  door,  suppliants  for  the  necessaries  of  life  from  those 
who   had  possessed   themselves  of  their  country   and  its 
resources.'*    But  most  of  the  Maoris  were  not  so  far-seeing. 
Equally  impulsive  in  their  appreciation  of  kindness  and  in 
their  resentment  of  injuries^  they  listened  readily  to  the  good- 
hearted  men  who  came  to  instruct  them,  not  merely  in 
religion,  but  also  in  everyday  civilization. 

The  missionaries  were  better  teachers,  at  any  rate,  thau 
many  of  the  traders  who,  having  gradually  got  into  the  way 
of  calling  at  friendly  ports  for  timber  and  other  native  pro- 
duce, now  also  began  to  settle  down  in  the  country.  At 
first,  and  in  most  districts,  they  were  welcomed  more  heartily 
than  the  missionaries.  *  Wh'^n  the  first  stragghng  ships  came 
here,'  says  one  of  them,  'the  smallest  bit  of  iron  was  a  ^>rize 

*  Martin,  vol.  iii.,  p.  124, 


ii*  ! 


!■    •!■■ 


MISSIONARIES  AND  TRADERS. 


325 


so  inestimable  that  I  might  be  thought  to  exaggerate  were  I 
to  tell  the  bare  truth  on  the  subject.  The  excitement  and 
speculation  caused  by  a  ship  being  seen  off  ♦•ihe  coast  were 
immense.  Where  would  she  anchor  ?  What  iron  could  be 
got  from  her?  Would  it  be  possible  to  seize  her?  The 
oracle  was  consulted ;  preparations  were  made  to  follow  her 
along  the  coast,  even  through  an  enemy's  country,  at  all 
risks  ;  and  when  she  disappeared  she  was  not  forgotten,  but 
would  continue  long  to  be  the  subject  of  anxious  expectation 
and  speculation.  After  this  regular  trading  began.  The 
great  madness  then  was  for  muskets  and  gunpowder.  A 
furious  compocition  was  kept  up.  Should  any  tribe  fail  to 
procure  a  stock  of  these  articles  as  soon  as  its  neighbours, 
extermination  was  its  probable  doom.  After  the  demand  for 
arms  was  supplied,  came  a  perfect  furor  for  iron  tools,  instru- 
ments of  husbandry,  clothing,  and  all  kinds  of  Pakeha  manu- 
factures.'"* The  Pakehas,  as  the  foreigners  who  brought 
these  articles  were  called,  were  gladly  received  by  the  New 
Zealanders,  who,  having  very  rough  notions  as  to  the  rights 
of  property,  generally  tried  first  to  steal  the  coveted  com- 
modities, and  if  they  failed  therein,  made  the  best  bargain 
they  could  with  the  traders. 

It  is  more  than  likely  that  the  merchants  were  not  very 
honest  in  their  dealings  with  these  natives,  and  that  they  did 
them  far  more  harm  than  good  by  their  intercourse.  Their 
ways  of  trade  were  often  lawless,  fraud  being  met  by  fraud, 
and  theft  by  violence  ;  and  the  things  in  which  they  traded 
were  some  of  them  altogether  obnoxious.  The  rum  and 
muskets  and  gunpowder  that  they  brought  into  the  country 
tended  greatly  to  demoralize  the  people,  and  to  encourage 
and  give  deadly  issue  to  the  feuds  that  were  always  frequent 
between  different  tribes.  The  flax,  gum,  and  other  com- 
modities that  they  took  in  exchange  for  these  stores  were  the 
fruits  of  wholesome  labour,  whereby  the  natives  were  greatly 
benefited ;  but,  in  these  old  times,  there  was  one  article  of 
commerce  which,  though  not  produced  in  great  quantities, 
*  *  Old  New  Zealand,'  by  a  Pakeha  Maori,  pp.  94,  95. 


,  I . 


lit 


!r) 


I   ■  I  i: 


J .:  k. 


V 


i> 


i 


l»l 


ill 

I 


326 


PAKEHA  NEW  ZEALAND. 


was  a  source  of  terrible  degradation.  Some  adventurous 
trader  having  taken  away  a  few  of  the  heads  which  it  was 
customary  for  the  iS  ew  Zealanders  to  sever  from  the  bodies 
of  their  slain  enemies,  to  be  dried  and  kept  as  treasures, 
these  barbarous  trophies  became  attractive  to  the  vulgar 
curiosity-hunters  in  Australia  and  in  Europe  ;  and  in  the  end 
traffic  in  heads  became  a  regular  branch  of  Pakeha  trade. 
The  trade  itself  was  bad  and  disgusting  enough  ;  but  when 
the  price  paid  for  the  heads  ran  high  enough  to  become  a 
premium  upon  murder,  it  became  indeed  debasing.  It 
was,  however,  a  source  of  great  profit.  *  The  skippers 
of  many  of  the  colonial  trading  schooners,'  it  is  said  by  an 
eye-witness  of  the  traffic,  '  were  always  ready  to  deal  with 
a  man  who  had  "  a  real  good  head,"  and  used  to  com- 
mission low  Pakehas  to  "  pick  up  heads  "  for  them.  It 
is  a  positive  fact  that  the  head  of  a  live  man  was  sold  and 
paid  for  beforehand,  and  afterwards  honestly  delivered  "  as 
per  agreement."  '* 

All  respectable  Pakehas  of  course  abstained  from  this  most 
loathsome  branch  of  New  Zealand  trade,  which  lasted  till 
about  the  year  1830 ;  but  there  was  much  evil  in  even  their 
best  intercourse  with  the  natives.     When  they  could  make 

*  '  Old  New  Zealand,'  p.  .59.  The  author  tells  (pp.  54-56),  how,  soon 
after  his  arrival,  he  came  by  accident  upon  a  collection  of  heads,  ready 
cured  for  the  market  and  exposed  for  sale,  imder  the  charge  of  one  of  the 
disreputable  whites  who  engaged  in  the  traffic.  '  One  had  undoubtedly 
been  a  warrior  ;  there  was  something  bold  and  defiant  about  the  look  of 
the  head.  Another  was  the  head  of  a  very  old  man,  grey,  shrivelled,  and 
wrinkled.  I  was  going  on  with  my  observations  when  I  was  saluted  by  a 
voics  from  behind  with,  "Looking  at  the  'eds,  sir?"  It  was  one  of  the 
Pakehas  formerly  mentioned.  "  Yes,"  said  I,  turning  round  just  the  least 
possible  thing  quicker  than  ordinary.  "  'Eds  has  been  a-getting  scarce," 
says  he.  "  I  should  think  so,"  says  I.  "  We  a'nt  'ad  a  'ed  this  long  time," 
says  he.  "  The  devil !"  says  I.  *'  One  of  them  'eds  has  been  hurt  bad," 
says  he.  "  I  should  think  all  were  rather  so,"  says  I.  "  Oh,  no  !  only  one 
on  'em,"  says  he  ;  "  the  skull  is  split,  and  it  won't  fetch  nothing,"  says  he. 
*'  Oh,  murder  !  I  see  now,"  says  I.  "  'Eds  was  werry  scarce,"  says  he, 
shaking  his  own  'ed.  "  Ah  !"  said  I.  "  They  had  to  tattoo  a  slave  a  bit 
ago,"  says  he,  "and  the  villain  ran  away,  tattooin'  and  all!"  says  he. 
"  What  ?"  said  I.  "  Bolted  afore  he  was  fit  to  kill,"  says  he.  "  Stole  off 
with  his  own  head  ?"  says  I.  •'  That's  just  it,"  says  he.  "  Capital  felony," 
says  I.  "  You  may  say  that,  sir,"  says  he.  •'  Good  morning,"  said  I,  and 
walked  away  pretty  smartly. ' 


I    !    I 


Ij 


VICIOUS  TRADING. 


327 


adventurous 
hlch  it  was 
n  the  bodies 
513  treasures, 
)  the  vulgar 
ad  in  the  end 
akeha  trade. 
L ;  but  when 
to  become  a 
ebasing.      It 
Clie  skippers 
5  said  by  an 
to  deal  with 
ised  to  com- 
or  them.    It 
vas  sold  and 
.elivered  "  as 

rom  this  most 
ch  lasted  till 
in  even  their 
could  make 

-56),  how,  soon 
of  heads,  ready 
ge  of  one  of  the 
lad  undoubtedly 
bout  the  look  of 
,  shrivelled,  and 
was  saluted  by  a 
was  one  of  the 
md  just  the  least 
L-gelting  scarce," 
i  this  long  time," 
been  hurt  bad," 
Oh,  no  !  only  one 
othing,"  says  he. 
scarce,"  says  he, 
ttoo  a  slave  a  bit 
all !"  says  he, 
s  he.     "  Stole  off 
Capital  felony," 
ling,"  said  I,  and 


profit  out  of  the  bad  passions  of  the  people,  they  too  often 
used  their  opportunities.  Sometimes  we  find  them  in  league 
with  the  natives  for  carrying  out  their  most  revolting 
practices.  Of  this  one  instance  will  sutfice.  '  In  December, 
1830,'  we  are  told,  '  a  Captain  Stewart,  commanding  the  brig 
Elizabeth,  on  promise  of  ten  tons  of  flax,  took  a  hundred 
New^  Zealanders  from  Kapiti,  or  Entry  Island,  in  Cook's 
Straits,  to  Takou,  in  Bank's  Peninsula,  concealed  in  his 
vessel.  He  then  enticed  on  board  the  chief  of  Takou,  his 
brother,  his  two  daughters,  and  some  others  who  came  un- 
suspicious of  any  ambush.  On  entering  the  captain's  cabin 
the  door  was  locked  upon  the  unhappy  chief,  his  hands  were 
tied,  a  hook  with  a  cord  attached  was  stuck  through  the 
skin  of  his  throat,  under  the  side  of  his  jaw,  and  the  line 
fastened  to  some  part  of  the  cabin,  in  which  state  of  torture 
he  was  kept  for  two  days,  until  the  vessel  arrived  at  Kapiti, 
when  he  was  put  to  death.  All  the  men  and  women  who 
accompanied  the  chief  were  massacred.  As  a  crowning 
enormity,  the  "  ship's  coppers  "  are  even  stated  to  have  been 
employed  in  cooking  the  remains  of  the  victims  for  the 
cannibals,  whose  brutal  ferocity  was  not  yet  satiated.'* 

These  circumstances,  with  many  others  of  almost  equal 
enormity,  showing  that  some  of  the  Pakehas  abstained  from 
no  wrong-doing  which  could  increase  their  influence  with 
friendly  tribes  and  promote  their  trading  enterprise,  were 
reported  to  Viscount  Goderich,  then  Colonial  Secretary,  in 
1831.  *It  is  impossible,'  he  said,  in  a  despatch  to  Sir 
Richard  Bourke,  the  Governor  of  New  South  Wales,  who 
had  declared  his  inability  to  prevent  the  vicious  practices, 
'  to  read,  without  shame  and  indignation,  the  details  which 
these  documents  disclose.  The  unfortunate  natives  of  New 
Zealand,  unless  some  decisive  measures  of  prevention  be 
adopted,  will,  I  fear,  be  shortly  added  to  the  number  of 
those  barbarous  tribes  who,  in  different  parts  of  the  globe, 
have  fallen  a  sacrifice  to  their  intercourse  with  civilized  men 
who  bear  and  disgrace  the  name  of  Christians.  When,  for 
*  Martin,  vol,  iii.,  pp.  125,  126. 


\'.M 


M 


I '  1 


■||.     i: 


,1       I 


N 


''■  < 


■'I  1 

i   ' 

1 

■ 

:l         1 

: 

y 

■i 

1 

1  ; 
■ 

■  > 


I 

a 


1  ■  I 


\»\'\ 


I 


I 


328 


PAKEHA  NEW  ZEALAND. 


mercenary  purposes,  the  natives  of  Europe  minister  to  the 
passions  by  which  these  savages  are  inflamed  against  each 
other,  and  introduce  them  to  the  knowledge  of  depraved  acts 
and  Hcentious  gratifications  of  the  most  debased  inhabitants 
of  our  great  cities,  the  inevitable  consequence  is  a  rapid  de- 
cline of  population,  preceded  by  every  variety  of  suffering. 
Considering  what  is  the  character  of  a  large  part  of  the 
population  of  New  South  Wales  and  Van  Diemen's  Laud, 
and  what  opportunities  of  settling  themselves  in  New 
Zealand  are  afforded  them  by  the  extensive  intercourse 
which  has  recently  been  established,  adverting  also  to  the 
conduct  which  has  been  pursued  in  these  islands  by  the 
masters  and  crews  of  British  vessels,  I  cannot  contemplate 
the  too  probable  results  without  the  deepest  anxiety.' 

That  that  anxiety  was  well-ijunded  the  later  history  of 
New  Zealand  abundantly  proves.  The  efforts  of  the  British 
Government  and  the  authorities  of  New  South  Wales,  to 
which  New  Zealand  gradually  became  a  sort  of  appendage, 
were  only  successful  in  checking  the  worst  exhibitions  of 
misconduct  on  the  part  of  the  Pakeha  traders  among  the 
Maoris.  These  Pakehas  grew  more  numerous  and  more  in- 
fluential. All  along  the  shores  of  the  northern  island  they 
made  their  settlements  and  extended  their  operations. 
Land  they  rarely  sought  to  buy,  and  thus  they  were  not 
regarded  as  aggressors  by  the  natives,  and  escaped  much 
jealousy  that  attended  the  progress  of  the  missionaries 
among  all  who  did  not  yield  to  their  religious  influences. 
Two  parties,  indeed,  grew  up  in  New  Zealand,  and  gained 
strength  during  the  thirty  years  or  so  previous  to  the  estab- 
lishment of  a  regular  colony  in  it.  Both  parties  abandoned 
some  of  their  primitive  barbarism  under  English  teaching  ; 
the  one  taking  their  lessons  from  traders,  whose  instruc- 
tion, advantageous  in  some  respects,  was  pernicious  in  most ; 
the  others  being  guided  by  missionaries,  who,  seeking  to  do 
only  good,  and  succeeding  to  a  great  extent,  also  did  serious 
harm  by  favouring  their  converts,  and  encouraging  them  In 
professions  of  authority  over  their  heathen  neighbours,  and 


MAORI  CONVERTS. 


329 


in  schemes  of  aggression  which,  thought  by  the  missionaries 
to  be  helpful  to  the  spread  of  Christianity,  have  produced 
very  different  fruit. 

The  appearances  were  greater  than  the  reality,  yet  during 
this  period  the  New  Zealanders  were,  in  many  respects, 
much  improved  by  their  contact  with  tne  Englishmen.  '  At 
Waimati,'  said  Charles  Darwin,  the  eminent  naturalist,  who 
visited  New  Zealand  in  1835,  *  there  are  three  large  houses 
where  missionaries  reside,  and  near  them  are  the  huts 
of  the  native  labourers.  On  an  adjoining  slope,  fine  crops 
of  barley  and  wheat  were  standing  in  full  ear,  and  in  another 
part  fields  of  potatoes  and  clover.  There  were  large  gardens 
with  every  fruit  and  vegetable  which  England  produces,  and 
many  belonging  to  warmer  climates.  Around  the  farm-yard 
there  were  stables,  a  thrashing-barn,  with  its  winnowing 
machine,  a  blacksmith's  forge,  and,  on  the  ground,  plough- 
shares and  other  tools.  In  the  middle  was  that  happy 
mixture  of  pigs  and  poultry,  lying  comfortably  together,  as 
in  every  English  farm-yard.  At  the  distance  of  a  few 
hundred  yards,  where  the  water  of  a  little  rill  had  been 
dammed  up  into  a  pool,  there  was  a  large  and  substantial 
water-mill.  This  is  very  surprising  when  it  is  considered 
that  five  years  ago  nothing  but  the  fern  flourished  here.'* 

If  this  measure  of  civilization  existed  only  in  small  dis- 
tricts, its  effects  were  widespread.  Native  warfare  became 
much  less  frequent  than  it  had  been  in  former  times,  and 
many  chieftains  were  encouraged  to  cultivate  the  arts  of 
peace,  although  it  was  impossible  to  utterly  eradicate 
nabits  that  had  come  to  be  a  second  nature  to  them.  A 
characteristic  anecdote  was  related  by  Darwin.  '  A  mission- 
ary,' he  said,  '  found  a  chief  and  his  tribe  in  preparation  for 
war  ;  their  muskets  clean  and  bright,  and  their  ammunition 
ready.  He  reasoned  long  on  the  inutility  of  the  war,  and 
the  httle  provocation  which  had  been  given  for  it.  The 
chief  was  much  shaken  in  his  resolution,  and  seemed  in 

*  Darwin,  *  Researches  into  the  Natural  History  of  Various  Countries,' 
p.  425. 


7'- 


■ii' 


I; 

J! 


I 

11:  !i 

i    !  I    I  i 


i 


!^t 


t'l  III 


\m 


330 


PAKEHA  NEW  ZEALAND. 


'\ 


\y 


(  I 


I  s 


doubt.  But  at  length  it  occurred  to  him  that  a  barrel  of 
gunpowder  was  in  a  bad  state,  and  that  it  would  not  keep 
much  longer.     This  settled  the  matter.'* 

Exaggerated  views  of  the  Maori  chai^acter,  both  in  its 
good  and  in  its  bad  aspects,  having  in  later  times  been  pro- 
mulgated, it  will  be  well  to  adduce  the  trustworthy  opinion 
arrived  at  by  one  who  had  long  opportunities  of  observing  it 
during  the  time  of  Pakeha  influence.  '  They  are,'  he  says, 
*  neither  so  good  nor  so  bad  as  their  friends  and  enemies 
liave  painted  them,  and,  I  suspect,  are  pretty  much  like 
wliat  almost  any  other  people  would  have  become  if  sub- 
jected to  the  same  external  circumstances.  For  ages  they 
have  struggled  against  necessity  in  all  its  shapes.  This  has 
given  to  them  a  remarkable  greediness  for  gain  in  every 
visible  and  immediately  tangible  form.  Without  the  aid  of 
iron,  the  most  trifling  tool  or  utensil  could  only  be  procured 
by  an  enormously  disproportionate  outlay  of  labour  in  its 
construction,  and,  in  consequence,  it  became  precious  to  a 
degree  scarcely  conceivable  by  people  of  civilized  and 
wealthy  countries.  This  great  value,  attached  to  personal 
property  of  all  kinds,  increased  proportionately  the  tempta- 
tion to  plunder ;  and  where  no  law  existed,  or  could  exist, 
of  sufficient  force  to  repress  the  inclination,  every  man,  as  a 
natural  consequence,  became  a  soldier,  if  it  were  only  for  the 
defence  of  his  own  property,  and  that  of  those  who  were 
banded  with  him,  his  tribe  or  family.  From  this  state  of 
things  regular  warfare  arose  as  a  matter  of  course.  The 
military  art  was  studied  as  a  science,  and  brought  to  great 
perfection,  as  applied  to  the  arms  used,  and  a  marked 
military  character  was  given  to  the  people.  The  necessity 
of  labour,  the  necessity  of  warfare,  and  a  temperate  climate, 
gave  them  strength  of  body,  accompanied  by  a  perseverance 
and  energy  of  mind  perfectly  astonishing.  With  rude  and 
blunt  stones  they  felled  the  giant  kauri,  toughest  of  pines ; 
and  from  it,  in  process  of  time,  at  an  expense  of  labour, 
perseverance,  and  ingenuity  astounding  to  those  who  kno^Y 

*  Darwin,  p.  419. 


:  ,  ;;! 


( 


1* 


THE  CHARACTER  OF  THE  MAORIS, 


331 


what  it  really  was,  they  produced,  carved,  painted,  and 
inlaid,  a  masterpiece  of  art  and  an  object  of  beauty — the 
war-canoe,  capable  of  carrying  a  hundred  men  on  a  distant 
expedition,  through  the  boisterous  seas  surrounding  their 
island.      As   a   consequence   of    their   warlike   habits   and 
character,  they  are  self-possessed  and  confident  in  them- 
selves and  their  own  powers,  and  have  much  diplomatic 
finesse  and  casuistry  at  command.   Their  intelligence  causes 
them  theoretically  to  acknowledge  the  benefits  of  law,  which 
they  see  established  among  us  ;  but  their  hatred  of  restraint 
causes  them  practically  to  abhor  and  resist  its  full  enforce- 
ment  amongst  themselves.      Doubting  our  professions  of 
friendship,  fearing  our  ultimate  designs,  led  astray  by  false 
friends,  possessed  of  that  "  little  learning  "  which  is,  in  their 
case,  most  emphatically  "  a  dangerous  thing  " — such  are 
the  people  with  whom  we  are  now  in  contact ;    such  the 
people  to  whom,  for  our  own  safety  and  their  preservation, 
we  must  give  new  laws  and  institutions,  new  habits  of  life, 
new  ideas,  sentiments,  and  information ;  whom  we  must 
either  civilize,  or,  by  our  mere  contact,  exterminate.'* 

*  '  Old  New  Zealand,'  pp.  91-93. 


^■. 


^' 

•  i  M 

1'    ^ 

I   ; 

If! 


1'  'I 


li 


fJMnl 


\Wd 


ill 


.  ih 


!!^l 


M.tjii 


I   .1 


ri 


Ml 


nn 


I 


HI 

1: 


n 


I 

j 

•i        T: 

;;1 


n\ 


'  n 


:i-    ^ 


V 

[I'll 


1 


i-    / 


5U 


,1       i!J 


/. 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 

NEW   ZEALAND   COLONIZATION. 

THE  OLD  PAKEHA  POPULATION — THE  NEW  ZEALAND  OOMPANT — ESTABLISH- 
MENT OF  BRITISH  SOVEREIGNTY  IN  NEW  ZEALAND,  AND  ITS  CONSTRUC- 
TION AS  A  REGULAR  COLONY — ITS  PROGRESS — LAND-QUARRELS  WITH  THE 
NATIVES — THEIR  ATTEMPTED  PROTECTION  BY  THE  GOVERNMENT — THK 
INFLUENCE    OF    THE    MISSIONARIES — LATER     GROWTH     OF    THE     COLONY. 

[1839-1867.] 

N  the  early  part  of  1839  there  were  about  two 
thousand  Pakchas,  or  EngUsh  residents,  in  New 
Zealand,  some  of  them  as  missionaries  and  their 
dependents,  but  most  of  them  as  traders  of  one 
sort  or  another.  They  were  scattered  along  the 
shore,  and  in  various  inland  parts,  though  chiefly  in  the 
northern  island,  or  New  Ulster,  and  especially  in  its  most 
northern  districts.  Kororarika,  in  the  Bay  of  Islands,  was 
the  locality  most  frequented  by  them ;  and  there,  in  1838, 
a  sort  of  republic  had  been  formed,  with  laws  of  its  own 
making,  for  mutual  assistance  and  protection  in  dealings 
with  the  natives.  The  report  of  this  organization  seems  to 
have  encouraged  some  English  adventurers  in  the  adoption 
of  schemes,  previously  advanced,  for  establishing  in  New 
Zealand  a  regular  colony. 

The  schemes  had  taken  shape  in  the  founding,  in  1837,  of 
a  New  Zealand  Association,  designed  to  carry  out  plans  very 
similar  to  those  that  already  had  been  tried  and  had  failed 
in  South  Australia.    In  both  cases  the  guiding  genius  was 


1^ 


TJunnullLl  iTnTrcwiirnT.ni=i««1 

y 

)     .^ 

^^"^^  1 

m 

^^^    i 

%i\ 

<*fel»X  [l  f 

t^i'^ 

'^^^^\  r^      \ 

^m 

liriLT!'  -r-:-:'r-7Jini4 

OMPANT — BSTABLISH  • 
AND  ITS  CONSTItUC- 
-QUARRELS  WITH  THE 
!  GOVEHNMBNT— THE 
H     OF    THE     COLONY. 


were  about  two 

esidents,  in  New 

onaries  and  their 

IS  traders  of  one 

ittered  along  the 

;h  chiefly  in  the 

ially  in  its  most 

of  Islands,  was 

there,  in  1838, 

laws  of  its  own 

ition  in  dealings 

ization  seems  to 

in  the  adoption 

)lishing  in  New 

ding,  in  1837,  of 
y  out  plans  very 
and  had  failed 
iing  genius  was 


TB£  NEW  ZEALAND  COMPANY. 


333 


Edward  Gibbon  "Wakefield ;  and  here  the  proposal  was  at 
once  to  buy  up  from  the  natives  large  tracts  of  land  to  be 
sold  to  private  adventurers,  to  whom  special  inducements 
were  to  be  offered  for  extending  English  civilization  over 
the  whole  country — all  which,  it  was  expected,  would  in  a 
short  time  pass  from  its  native  owners  and  become  English 
property.  The  association,  being  refused  a  charter,  was 
dissolved ;  but  in  1838  it  was  revived  as  the  New  Zealand 
Company,  which,  its  proposals  being  again  rejected  by  the 
Government,  proceeded  to  put  them  in  force  without 
authority.  It  had  many  supporters,  and  Colonel  Wake- 
field, the  son  of  the  projector,  went  out  with  a  party  of 
pioneers.  He  reached  Cook  Strait  in  August,  1839,  and  in 
the  course  of  two  months  went  through  the  form  of  buying 
land,  on  both  sides  of  the  channel,  which  formed  in  all  a 
territory  as  large  as  Ireland,  for  about  £1,500  worth  of 
muskets,  gunpowder,  tomahawks,  pocket-handkerchiefs, 
tobacco,  Jews'  harps,  and  other  articles ;  being  at  the  rate 
of  about  sixpenny  worth  of  goods  for  every  thousand  acres. 
The  chieftains  of  whom  it  was  bought  had,  of  course,  no 
right  to  sell  it ;  but,  if  this  was  known  to  the  leaders  of 
the  enterprise,  it  was  not  understood  by  most  of  the  colonists 
who  were  induced  to  join  in  the  work,  and  who,  soon  after 
landing,  found  themselves  involved  in  serious  ditSculties 
with  the  natives  on  account  of  their  aggressions. 

They  had  difficulties  also  with  the  English  Government. 
In  June,  1839,  instructions  were  sent  out  by  Lord  Normanby, 
then  Colonial  Secretary,  to  the  Governor  of  New  South 
Wales,  authorizing  him  to  regard  all  British  residents  in 
New  Zealand  as  his  subjects,  and,  bo+h  on  their  behalf  and 
in  the  interests  of  the  natives,  to  treat  with  the  latter  for 
the  purchase  of  land.  These  instructions,  designed  espe- 
cially as  a  curb  upon  the  ill-planned  projects  of  the  New 
Zealand  Company,  were  wise  and  generous.  '  The  Queen,' 
it  was  there  said,  'disclaims,  for  herself  and  for  her  subjects, 
every  pretension  to  seize  on  the  islands  of  New  Zealand,  or 
to  govern  them  as  a  part  of  the  dominion  of  Great  Britain, 


II 


i.:i;l 


wm 


f!:l| 


m% 


Y  ii'ii 


i 


t 


334 


NEIV  ZEALAND  COLONIZATION. 


unless  the  free  and  intelligent  consent  of  the  natives,  ex- 
pressed according  to  their  established  usages,  shall  be  first 
obtained.'  Careful  directions  were  given  with  a  view  to 
securing  this  end,  and  to  the  observance  of  sincerity,  justice, 
and  good-faitli  in  all  dealings  with  the  natives.  '  Nor  is 
this  all,'  it  was  added.  '  They  must  not  be  permitted  to 
enter  into  any  contracts  in  which  they  might  be  ignorant 
and  unintentional  authors  of  injuries  to  themselves.  You 
will  not,  for  example,  purchase  from  them  any  territory, 
the  retention  of  which  by  them  would  be  essential  or  highly 
conducive  to  their  own  comfort,  safety,  or  subsistence.  The 
acquisition  of  land  by  the  Crown  for  the  future  settlement 
of  British  subjects  must  be  confined  to  such  districts  as  the 
natives  can  alienate  without  distress  or  serious  incon- 
venience to  themselves.  To  secure  the  observance  of  this 
will  be  one  of  the  first  duties  of  their  official  protector.'" 

The  English  Government  cannot  be  blamed  for  the  troubles 
that  began  in  that  early  day,  and  afterwards  became  very 
grievous,  through  the  greed  of  private  speculators,  and  the 
jealous,  violent  patriotism  of  the  New  Zealanders.  In 
accordance  with  the  instructions  issued  by  Lord  Normanby, 
Captain  Hobson  was  sent  to  New  Zealand  as  lieutenant- 
governor.  He  reached  Kororarika,  in  the  Bay  of  Islands, 
on  the  29th  of  January,  1840,  and  there  established  the  rule 
of  English  law  in  lieu  of  the  self-governing  regulations  of 
its  British  residents.  In  February  he  had  a  conference  with 
forty-six  chiefs  of  the  islands  and  neighbouring  mainland, 
and  submitted  to  them  a  treaty  by  which  they  recognised 
the  sovereignty  of  Queen  Victoria,  on  condition  of  having 
all  their  local  rights  and  privileges  respected.  '  Send  the 
man  away  !'  said  one  chief,  with  whom  many  sympathized. 
'  Do  not  sign  the  paper.  If  you  do,  you  will  be  reduced  to 
the  condition  of  slaves,  and  be  obliged  to  break  stones  to 
make  roads.  Your  land  will  be  taken  from  you,  and  your 
dignity  as  chiefs  will  be  destroyed.'  But  other  chiefs  thought 
differently,  and  urged  so  eloquently  the  value  of  alliance 
*  'Parliamentary  Papers,'  1840,  pp.  157-42. 


ii! 


ITS  FORMAL  COMMENCEMENT. 


335 


with  Great  Britain  that  all  were  convinced,  and  the  treaty 
was  signed.  '  You  must  be  our  father  !'  said  the  leader  of 
this  friendly  party  to  Captain  Hobson.  *  You  must  not 
allow  us  to  become  slaves  !  you  must  preserve  our  customs, 
and  never  permit  our  lands  to  be  wrested  from  us  !'  Captain 
Hobson  afterwards  visited  the  principal  parts  of  New  Ulster, 
and  sent  a  deputy  on  a  like  tour  through  New  Muuster. 
Everywhere  he  received  the  submission  of  the  principal 
chiefs.  Thus  British  sovereignty  was  commenced  in  New 
Zealand. 

On  the  16th  of  Noveinber,  1840,  the  colony  of  Now  Zea- 
land was  established  by  charter,  and  Captain  Hobson  was 
appointed  its  first  governor.  He  was  empowered  to  grant 
'  \v^aste  and  uncleared  lands '  to  European  settlers,  *  provided 
that  nothing  shall  affect  or  be  construed  to  affect  the  rights 
of  any  aboriginal  natives  of  the  colony,  to  the  actual  occu- 
pation or  enjoyment  in  their  own  persons,  or  in  the  persons 
of  their  descendants,  of  any  lands  now  occupied  or  enjoyed 
by  such  natives.'  Captain  Hobson  was  also  enjoined  '  to 
promote  education  among  the  native  inhabitants ;  to  protect 
them  in  their  persons,  and  in  the  free  enjoyment  of  their 
possessions ;  by  all  means  to  prevent  and  restrain  all  violence 
and  injustice  which  may  In  any  manner  be  practised  or 
attempted  against  them  ;  and  to  take  such  measures  as  may 
appear  necessary  for  their  conversion  to  the  Christian  faith, 
and  for  their  advancement  in  civilisation.' 

No  colony  ever  began  better  in  theory ;  but  in  practice 
the  generous  principles  propounded  were  found  utterly  un- 
tenable. The  n?.tive  chiefs,  in  yielding  submission  to  the 
Enghsh  Crown,  thought  they  were  only  conferring  on  it 
magisterial  powers,  and  intended  to  keep  their  territorial 
rights  intact.  In  the  treaty  nothing  had  been  said  about 
'  waste  lands,'  and  the  natives  considered  that  there  were 
no  *  waste  lands  '  at  all  in  the  country.  Every  acre,  whether 
cultivated  or  left  desolate,  had  some  individual  claimant,  or 
was  regarded  as  the  common  property  of  the  members  of 
some  tribe ;  and,  though  at  first  they  offered  little  or  no 


[  ii| 


W| 


Nl 


m. 


lit 


'I 

•  "I 


336 


NEW  ZEAL/iND  COLONIZATION, 


i^\ 


]\\     !■ 


objection  to  small  appropriations  of  land  on  tho  coast, 
especially  when  they  knew  that  the  monster  pretensions  of 
the  New  Zealand  Company  were  repudiated  by  the  Oovuni- 
ment,  their  jealousy  was  aroused  when  much  larger  allot- 
ments began  to  bo  madp.  This  was  soon  the  case.  The 
New  Zealand  Company  had  caused  a  tide  of  immigration, 
which  was  strengthened  as  soon  as  the  country  was  known 
to  be  formally  annexed  to  the  Crown;  and  however  zealously 
Captain  Hobson  sought  to  act  upon  his  instructions  and 
respect  all  native  rights,  he  could  not  bring  himself  to  send 
back  the  English  settlors,  or  prevent  them  from  acquiring 
property  which,  even  if  it  seemed  to  be  fairly  bought,  was 
declared  by  the  natives  to  have  been  wrongfully  taken 
possession  of.  In  other  respects,  too,  his  instructions  were 
found  to  be  inconsistent.  He  was  to  respect  all  native 
rights ;  he  was  also  to  extend  civilization.  Among  the 
rights  most  dear  to  the  natives  were  some,  like  cannibalism 
or  the  practice  of  human  sacrifices,  which  no  scheme  of 
civilization  couM  tolerate  ;  and  in  the  efforts  made  to  sup- 
press them  great  offence  was  given  to  many  of  the  people 
who,  it  had  been  expected,  would  be  the  most  faithful 
supporters  of  English  rule.  On  these  and  kindred  points  it 
is  not  here  necessary  to  c  ier  into  details;  but  they  must 
be  borne  in  mind  as  explaining  the  ill-will  which,  if  sup- 
pressed at  first,  was  destined  to  break  out  in  the  deplorable 
occurrences  of  later  days. 

There  was  not,  however,  much  show  of  ill-will  in  the 
beginning  of  the  colony's  history.  It  progressed  rapidly. 
In  the  four  years  ending  with  May,  1843,  the  New  Zealand 
Company  sent  out  8,796  colonists,  and  others  came  by 
other  channels.  The  white  population,  numbering  about 
2,000  in  1839,  had  increased  to  11,948  in  1844,  and  to 
20,396  in  1849.  It  continued  to  increase  very  quick.  In 
1858  it  amounted  to  59,254,  in  1864  to  173,618,  and  in  1867 
to  218,668. 

Nine  little  settlements,  now  the  centres  of  as  many 
provinces,  were  planted  in  New  Zealand.    Auckland,  to 


THE  NIXE  PROVINCES, 


337 


which   tho   seat   of  government  was  transferred  from  the 
Bay  of  Islands,  is  the  most  northern  of  these,  and  from  its 
official  associations  as  well  as  from  tho  excellent  position  of 
its  harbour,  and  its  consequent  facilities  for  trade,  was  for 
a  long  time  tho  richest  and  most  populous.     Below  it,  on 
the  western  side,  of  New  Ulster,  the  settlement  of  New 
Plymouth,  or  Taranaki,  *  the    garden    of    Now   Zealand,' 
was    founded    in    1841    by    some  adventurers  from   the 
west     of     England,    under    the    auspices    of    the    New 
Zealand   Company.     Wellington,  occupying   the   southern 
part  of    the  island,  begun  a  year  earlier,  was    the  chief 
Boene  of   the  operations   of    the   New  Zealand  Company, 
and   prospered  in    spite    of    the   serious    difficulties    that 
attended   its    early   history,  owing   to   disputes    with   the 
natives    concerning    land-claims,   which    the  Government 
could  only  settle  by  giving  offence  both  to  settlers  and  to 
natives.     Napier,  the  northern  port  of  this  section,  after- 
wards became  the  capital  of  the  province  of  Hawke's  Bay, 
stretching  up  to  Auckland  on  the  eastern  side,  which  was 
establishecl  in  1858.     Nelson,  forming  the  northern  portion 
of  New  Munster,  or  South  Island,  was  another  settlement 
of  the  New  Zealand  Company,  dating  from  1841,  and  for 
some  time  it  was  the  only  centre  of  colonization  in  this 
island.     Its  eastern  half  w^as  in  1860  converted  into  the 
separate  province  of  Marlborough.    The  southern  district 
was  colonized  in   1848,  under   the  name  of  Otago,  by  a 
Scotch  Company ;   and  Canterbury,  occupying  the  centre 
of  New   Munster  —  from  which    the   province  known   as 
Westland  was  detached  in  1867 — was  inaugurated  in  1850 
by  a  party  of  Church  of  England  colonists.      Otago  and 
Canterbury,  after  long  struggling  against  misfortunes,  and 
vainly  attempting  to  be  model  religious  colonies,  the  one 
Presbyterian,  the  other  Episcopalian,  ultimately  became 
the  most  prosperous  of  all,  owing  to  the  discovery  in  them 
of  profitable  gold-fields. 

The  separate  history  of  these  nine  settlements,  diverse 
<and  complicated,  but  monotonous  in  its  series  of  quarrels 

22 


)r 


I    ■ 


i'i 


\) 


it 
'li 
i! 


::;i' 


"I 


I  Ml  i\   ,|! 

h 


m 


'I'l 


■■Ml 


f  ri 

ii 


338 


NEW  ZEALAND  COLONIZATION. 


'f'i 


.! 


I  I 


i' 

:^1 


I     ' 


M 


"  ^  I 


concerning  land  between  settlers  and  natives,  need  not  be 
recounted.  Each  settlement  gradually  grew  from  a  sea-port 
in  which  the  colonists  first  made  sure  their  footiig,  and 
thence,  step  by  step,  encroached  upon  the  inland  possessions 
of  the  Maoris,  and  so  aroused  their  hatred,  to  be  long  sup- 
pressed, or  only  exhibited  in  occasional  and  partir.,1  outbursts 
of  fury,  but  to  be  in  no  way  lessened  by  time. 

The  discontent  of  the  natives  was  restrained  by  two 
causes — the  prudent  behaviour  of  the  Government  and  the 
powerful  influence  of  the  missionaries.  Captain  Hobson, 
the  first  governor,  was  zealous  in  his  endeavours  to  see  that, 
at  any  rate,  partial  justice  was  done,  and  thereby  he  earned 
the  vehement  opposition  of  most  of  his  white  subjects.  Ho 
died  in  1842,  but  his  policy  was  continued,  as  far  as  the 
difiBcult  circumstances  allowed,  by  his  successor,  Captain, 
afterwards  Admiral,  Fitzroy,  and  by  the  third  governor, 
Captain,  afterwards  Sir  George,  Grey,  who  ruled  from  1845 
to  1853.     But  governors  could  not  do  much. 

The  chiei.  pacificators  of  the  Maoris  were  the  missionaries. 
Their  disinterested  and  persevering  labours  had  made  many 
converts  before  New  Zealand  became  a  Crown  colony  in  1840, 
and  after  that  date  they  carried  on  their  work  so  zealously 
that  nearly  all  the  natives  were  in  the  end  made  Christians 
in  name.  The  religious  influence  was  not  very  deep,  but  in 
outward  show  i*".  was  very  great,  and  it  was  not  ail  super- 
ficial. The  worst  vices  of  the  Maoris  w^ere  nearly  eradicated, 
and  the  worst  barbarities  in  which  they  now  indulge  bear 
no  comparison  to  those  which  were  the  rule  in  former  times. 
For  many  years  it  seemed  not  only  as  if  their  heathen 
customs  had  been  altogether  rooted  out,  but  as  if  they  had 
been  taught  the  harder  lesson  of  patient  submission  to  the 
aggressive  policy  of  the  English  settlers.  Here  and  there 
there  were  violent  outbursts  of  vindictive  fury,  which  will 
be  noticed  in  the  next  chapter ;  but  generally,  and  in  most 
districts,  the  natives  were  induced  to  give  way,  if  not  with- 
out murmuring,  at  any  rate  without  open  resistance,  it 
was  no  slight  achievement  to  persuade  them  meekly  to 


THE  PROGRESS  OF  THE  COLONY. 


339 


need  not  be 
)m  a  sea-port 
footiig,  and 
d  possessions 
be  long  sup- 
•bica  outbursts 

lined  by  two 
ment  and  the 
)tain  Hobson, 
,rs  to  see  that, 
eby  he  earned 
subjects.     He 
as  far  as  the 
3SSor,  Captain, 
bird  governor, 
lied  from  1845 

lb  missionaries, 
ad  made  many 
colony  in  1840, 
•k  so  zealously 
ade  Christians 
y  deep,  but  in 
not  ail  super- 
,rly  eradicated, 
indulge  bear 
former  times, 
their  heathen 
as  if  they  had 
iiission  to  the 
:ere  and  there 
■y,  which  will 
and  in  most 
|y,  if  not  with- 
■esistance.    It 
sm  meekly  to 


abandon  their  homesteads  and  go  farther  into  the  forests, 
for  some  time  and  for  the  most  part  making  no  bolder 
complaint  than  appeared  in  such  pathetic  chants  as  this : 

'The  sun  fihines,  but  we  quit  our  land  ;  we  abandon  for  ever  its  forests, 

its  grovos,  its  lakes,  its  shores. 
All  its  fair  fisheries  here,  under  the  bright  sun,  we  renounce  for  ever. 
It  is  a  lovely  day  ;  fair  will  be  the  children  that  are  born  to-day  ;  but 
we  cjuit  our  land. 

In  some  parts  there  is  forest ;  in  others  the  ground  is  skimmed  over  by 

the  birds  in  their  flight  ; 
Upon  the  trees  there  is  fruit ;  in  the  streams,  fish  ;  in  the  fields,  potatoes  ; 

fern-trees  in  the  bush  ;  but  we  ([uit  our  land.' 

The  fertility  and  beauty  of  New  Zealand,  *  the  Britain  of 
the  South,'  might  well  endear  it  to  ii^  native  owners.  But 
at  first  very  slender  use  was  made  by  the  English  colonists 
of  its  natural  resources.  Until  the  gold-fields  were  discovered, 
the  trade  and  enterprise  of  the  cclony  did  not  even  keep 
pace  with  its  growth  of  population.  Then  the  new  emi- 
grants who  arrived  infused  a  new  energy  into  the  whole 
community.  In  1852  the  imports  were  only  worth  £359,444, 
the  exjiorts  £145,972.  In  1863  the  imports  amounted  in 
value  to  £7,024,674,  and  the  exports  to  £3,485,405.  More 
than  two-thirds  of  the  latter,  £2,432,479,  consisted  of  gold 
and  gold-dust.  Tho  other  staplew^as  wool,  the  export  of  whicli 
was  worth  £830,495.  In  1866  the  total  exports,  amounting 
to  £4,520,074,  included  £2,898,412  worth  of  gold,  and 
£1,354,152  worth  of  wool,  iietw'een  1858,  when  the  gold- 
Itields  were  first  opened,  and  1860,  the  metal  extracted 
[irom  them  and  exported  amounted  in  value  to  £98,455. 
hi  1861  it  was  £752,657.  After  that  it  averaged  nearly 
u2,50O,OOO  a  year — the  ten  yearn'  yield  up  to  September, 
jlSGS,  being    £16,404,673.      In    imi    about    one-third    of 

I  white  population  was  in  the  northern  island,  and 
Itwo-thirds  were  in  the  southern — about  a  quarter  each  in 
lAucklaud,  Canterbury,  and  Otago,  and  the  remaining 
[quarter  in  the  six  other  provinces. 


22—2 


'til 


.':^i'' 


I! 


<X\ 


ll 


-tf'^ 


if  I 


\\ 


i  ■       I 


CHAPTER  XXX. 

NEW   ZEALAND   WAEFARE. 

THE  RIVAL  RACES  IN  NEW  ZEALAND— THE  MAORI  WARS  OF  1843  AXP 
THE  FOLLOWING  YEARS— THE  SUBSEQUENT  CONDITION  OF  THE  MAORIS 
— THEIR  CIVILIZATION — THEIR  NUMBERS — THE  RENEWAL  OF  HOSTIU- 
TIES — THE  KINO-MOVEMENT  AND  ITS  ISSUE— HOSTILITIES  IN  1860  AND 
1861— THE  WAR  OF  1863  AND  1865— NATURE  OF  THE  STRIFE  AND 
LATER  GUERILLA  WARFARE — THE  PAI-MARIRE  OR  HAU-HAU  SUPER- 
STITION— THE   ISSUE   OF  THE   STRUGGLE.      [1843-1869.] 

URING  some  three  hundred  years,  if  not  for  a 
much  longer  time,  the  Maoris  were  in  undis- 
turbed possession  of  New  Zealand.  They  culti- 
vated their  fields  and  caught  their  fish  and  game, 
and  enjoyed  themselves  in  their  own  barbarous 
way.  Endless  warfare  prevailed  between  rival  tribes  and  clans, 
audit  was  often  attended  by  hideous  atrocities;  but  in  spite  of 
this  and  other  drawbacks,  a  fine  race  of  savages  grew  up, 
almost  superior  to  any  other  savage  race  of  which  we  know. 
Then  the  Pakehas  came  among  them,  some  as  missionaries, 
others  as  traders  ;  and  though  their  numbers  were  few, 
their  influence  was  rapidly  felt  among  nearly  the  whole 
community  of  natives.  '  Civilization,'  partly  good  and 
partly  bad,  but  equally  powerful  whether  good  or  bad,  began 
a  rapid  disintegration  of  the  barbarous  elements ;  and, 
though  many  held  aloof  in  sullen  wrath,  the  great  majority 
of  the  Maoris  were  attracted  to  jduropean  institutions.  That 
preparation  for  English  colonization  extended  over  about 
thirty  years,  and  it  was  followed  by  more  systematic  and 


m. 


THE  RIVAL  RACES  IN  NEW  ZEALAND.        341 

better  authorized  colonial  enterprise,  which  lasted  for  about 
thirty  other  years,  before  the  title  of  *  the  Britain  of  the 
South,'  which  was  given  to  New  Zealand,  was  in  any  way 
deserved.  Some  aspects  of  the  struggle  preliminary  to  the 
whole  of  Maori-land  becoming  Pakeha-land  are  well  worth 
noting. 

That  New  Zealand  should  cease  to  be  a  mere  haunt  of 
lawless  savages,  however  noble  may  be  some  characteristics 
of  their  savage  life,  and  should  be  developed  into  the  great 
centre  of  civilized  enterprise  and  civilizing  agency  for  which 
its  natural  fuaturp<:  and  its  place  in  the  South  Pacific  Ocean 
especially  adapt  it,  is  a  change  which  the  wisest  and  most 
far-seeing  philanthropy  cannot  but  approve,  however  nnich 
we  may  deplore  some  of  the  conditions  of  the  change.  The 
story  is  in  many  ways  distressing,  however,  and  none  the  less 
so  because  the  natives  themselves  are  conscious  of  their  fate, 
and,  while  loth  to  give  up  the  struggle,  know  that  it  cannot 
be  carried  on  for  very  much  longer.  *  As  the  Pakeha  fly  has 
driven  out  the  Maori  fly,'  they  sing,  in  one  of  their  plaintive 
chants ;  '  as  the  Pakeha  grass  has  killed  the  Maori  grass ; 
as  the  Pakeha  rat  has  slain  the  Maori  rat ;  as  the  Pakeha 
clover  has  starved  the  Maori  fern ;  so  will  the  Pakeha  push 
back  and  destroy  the  Maori.'  The  destroying  work  pro- 
ceeded with  equal  rapidity  during  the  years  in  which  the 
doomed  race  quietly  succT'mbed  to  its  destiny,  and  during 
those  in  which  it  strove  deb^icrately  to  avert  the  evil,  or,  at 
auy  rate,  to  punish  its  authors. 

With  onu  exception,  there  was  not  much  resistance  shown 
till  1861.  The  exception  was  in  1843  and  the  four  following 
years. 

In  1843  Colonel  Wakefield,  having  a  dispute  about  land 
with  some  chiefs,  determined  to  take  the  law  into  his  own 
hands,  and  accordingly  went  into  their  district  on  the  banks 
of  the  Wairau,  in  Nelson,  with  armed  followers,  and  hand- 
cuffs and  leg-irons,  for  maiking  captives  of  the  chiefs.  Tlie 
uatives  resenting  this  procedure,  ho  fired  upon  them,  and 
thus  brought  about  a  smaill  war,  which  led  to  a  temporary 


-'.I' 


li 


i» 


:Jl 


ll\f\ 


!j'l ;  ii  H  'i 


i  )1 


342 


NEW  ZEALAND  WAREARE. 


U 


\w\ 


•is 


i 


I'll 


defeat  of  the  English  intruders,  with  serious  loss  of  life.  *  So 
manifestly  illegal,  unjust,  and  unwise  were  the  martial 
array  and  the  command  to  advance,'  said  Lord  Stanley, 
afterwards  Earl  of  Derby,  who  was  then  Colonial  Secretary, 
'  that  the  authors  of  that  order  must  be  held  responsible  for 
all  that  followed  in  natural  and  immediate  sequence  upon 
it.  The  natives  only  exercised  the  rights  of  self-defence  and 
of  mutual  protection  against  an  imminent,  overwhelming, 
and  deadly  danger.  Eevolting  to  our  feelings  as  Cln-istians, 
and  to  our  opinions  as  members  of  a  civilized  State,  as  was 
the  ultimate  massacre,  it  is  impossible  to  deny  to  our  savage 
antagonists  the  benefits  of  the  apology  which  is  to  be  urged 
in  their  behalf.  They  who  provoke  an  indefensible  warfare 
with  barbarous  tribes  are  hardly  entitled  to  complain  of  the 
barbarities  inseparable  from  such  contests.'* 

The  effect  of  this  catastrophe  was  most  disastrous.  Ex- 
aggerated reports  of  it  were  spread  over  both  the  islands, 
and  the  irons  seized  from  the  English  aggressors  were 
exhibited  both  a-  tokens  of  what  they  meant  to  do  with 
the  Maoris,  if  they  could,  and  as  trophies  of  the  prowess 
by  which  they  had  been,  and  might  again  and  again  he, 
successfully  resisted.  Tribes  that  had  hitherto  submitted 
quietly  to  British  rule  now  gave  visible  signs  of  their  dis- 
content, and  the  tribes  that  had  always  been  inimical  now 
had  a  powerful  argument  in  favour  of  violent  opposition. 
An  open  feud  between  Maoris  and  Pakehas  began,  never  to 
be  thoroughly  healed. 

It  found  expression  in  several  acts  of  hostility  during  the 
few  years  ensuing.  It  extended  so  far  north  that,  in  March, 
184:5,  Kororarika  was  invaded  and  destroyed,  the  mission- 
aries' quarter  alone  being  spared.  *  The  natives  carried  on 
their  work  of  plunder,'  said  Bishop  Selwyn,  who  witnessed 
it,  '  with  perfect  composure ;  neither  quarrelling  anion^' 
themselves,  nor  resenting  any  attempt  on  the  part  of  the 
English  to  recover  portions  of  their  property.  Several  of 
the  people  of  the  town  landed  in  the  midst  of  them,  and 
*  '  Report  of  Select  Parliamentary  Committee,'  1844,  pp.  172-171. 


THE  WAR  OF  1843  AND  ITS  ISSUE. 


343 


)egan,  never  to 


were  allowed  to  carry  off  such  things  as  were  not  particularly 
desired  by  the  spoilers.'* 

Here  and  elsewhere  the  Maoris  showed  remarkable 
moderation  in  their  resistance  of  the  colonists.  Violent 
in  their  opposition  to  those  who  sought  to  dispossess  them 
of  what  they  reasonably  regarded  as  their  lawful  property, 
they  did  no  harm  to  friendly  missionaries  and  traders,  and 
even  allowed  them  to  mix  freely  with  their  armies,  and  use 
all  the  conciliatory  arts  that  they  possessed.  Praiseworthy 
moderation  also  was  shown  by  Governor  Fitzroy  and  his 
successor,  Governor  Grey.  They  were  forced  to  obtain  from 
England  military  reinforcements  for  the  protection  of  the 
colonists,  but  they  used  them  with  a  prudence  that  gave 
great  offence  to  the  more  hot-headed  and  vindictive  of  these 
colonists.  By  help  of  friendly  natives  peace  was  made  with 
many  hostile  tribes;  and  those  which  still  carried  on  the 
war  were  gradually,  and  without  unnecessary  severity, 
driven  out  of  the  fastnesses  they  occupied  as  centres  of 
guerilla  warfare  during  1845,  1846,  and  1847. 

The  result  was  a  pacification  which  then  and  for  fourteen 
years  after  was  thought  to  be  final.  The  natives  confined 
themselves  to  their  tribal  wars,  and  these  became  rarer 
every  year.  The  old  grudges  were  not  forgotten  by  them, 
but  they  profited  by  intercourse  with  the  colonists.  '  They 
are  fond  of  agriculture,'  said  Sir  George  Grey  in  1849,  '  take 
great  pleasure  in  cattle  and  horses,  like  the  sea  and  form 
good  sailors,  are  attached  to  Europeans  and  admire  their 
customs  and  manners,  are  extremely  ambitious  of  rising  in 
civilization,  and  of  becoming  skilled  in  European  arts. 
They  are  apt  at  learning,  in  many  respects  extremely  con- 
scientious and  observant  of  their  word,  are  ambitious  of 
honours,  and  are  probably  the  most  covetous  race  in  the 
world  They  are  also  agreeable  in  manners,  and  attach- 
ments of  a  lasting  character  readily  spring  up  between  them 
and  the  Europeans.'  Civilized  ways  took  the  place  of  bar- 
barism, and  a  form  of  Christianity  which  satisfied  its 
*  •  Annals  of  the  Diocese  of  New  Zealand,'  p.  193. 


;'.!,•■» 


II  i  ■  ;i 


'H 


1: 

I 

'I 

I 


ill 


i-.' 


344 


NE W  ZEALAND  WA RFA RE. 


teachers  superseded  the  mild  polytheism  or  nature-worship 
which  had  formerly  been  dominant.  Civilization,  however, 
enervating  a  race  which  seemed  only  fit  for  the  wild  habits 
of  a  barbarism  that  was  not  altogether  barbarous,  caused  a 
more  rapid  dying  out  of  the  people  than  the  sword  would 
have  been  likely  to  effect,  and  close  and  impartial  observers 
assure  us  that  the  Christianity  was  only  superficial. 

The  native  population  of  New  Munster,  or  the  Middle 
Island,  never  very  numerous,  dwindled  from  about  15,000 
to  about  2,000,  most  of  whom  were  old  people,  between 
1848  and  1868.  In  New  Ulster,  or  the  Northern  Island, 
the  natives  were  estimated  at  105,000  in  1848,  and  at  36,000 
in  1868.  But  this  residue  consisted  of  the  most  vigorous 
and  determined  representatives  of  the  race,  men  willing  to 
gain  all  they  could  by  English  intercourse,  but  resolved  to 
receive  from  it  nothing  that  was  not  gain.  These  were  the 
people  with  whom  in  1860  and  afterwards  we  were  brought 
into  fierce  conflict,  and  among  them,  at  any  rate,  Christianity 
developed  no  spirit  of  meekness  or  self-abandonment.  All 
that  it  had  taught  them  was  to  cherish  a  love  of  independ- 
ence; and  for  ways  of  asserting  that  independence  they 
went  back  to  the  traditions  of  their  forefathers,  only  sub- 
stituting the  Christian  musket  for  the  heathen  tomahawk. 

Quaint  illustration  of  the  temper,  at  its  best,  in  which 
the  Maoris  entered  upon  the  contest  appears  in  the  parable 
with  which  an  old  chief  in  Taranaki  justified  his  participa- 
tion in  the  rebellion,  if  it  is  to  be  called  by  that  name, 
which  was  then  beginning.  Planting  a  long  fern-stick  in 
the  ground  to  represent  the  Deity,  he  held  two  shorter  ones 
in  his  hands,  which,  he  said,  represented  the  Maori  and  the 
Pakeha.  *  Before  the  Pakeha  came,'  he  proceeded,  '  we 
thought  ourselves  the  nearest  to  God,  and  standing  nearly 
equal  wuth  Him  ;'  and  he  planted  the  Maori  stick  close  to 
the  one  representing  the  Godhead.  '  But  when  the  Pakehas 
came,  we  thought  that  they  stood  higher  than  we  did,  that 
they  were  next  to  the  Godhead  ;'  so  he  put  the  Pakeha  stick 
near  to  the  tall  one,  and  removed  the  Maori  stick  to  a  dis- 


Mt 


THE  KING-MOVEMENT. 


345, 


tance  and  sunk  it  deep  in  the  earth.     '  But  now  we  have, 
learnt  that  the  Maori  and  the  Pakeha  issue  from  one  and 
the  same  source,  from  God ;  that  they  both  have  good  and 
evil  qualities,  and  are  alike  before  Him  ;'  so  he  planted  the. 
Maori  stick  beside  the  Pakeha  stick,  at  the  same  distance, 
from  the  stick  of  the  Godhead.     'Pakeha  and  Maori  are 
equal,'  he  exclaimed.     'They  have  equal  rights,  and  it  is 
proper  that  the  Maoris  should  have  their  king,  just  as  the 
Pakehas  have  theirs.' 

The  first  idea  of  setting  up  a  native  king  was  wisely  con- 
ceived. Its  chief  promoter  was  Wirimu  Tamihana,  better 
known  as  William  King,  a  zealous  Christian,  and  accounted 
one  of  the  most  diligent  leaders  of  civilization  and  English 
influence ;  and  his  purpose,  or  at  any  rate  that  avowed  by 
him,  was  to  bring  the  various  tribes  under  the  authority  of 
some  one  who  could  put  a  stop  to  the  disastrous  tribal  wars 
and  help  on  the  progress  of  his  subjects,  without  offering 
any  resistance  to  the  recognised  English  authorities.  *  The 
river  of  blood  was  open,'  he  said,  '  and  I  therefore  sought 
for  some  plan  to  make  it  cease.  I  applied  my  thoughts  to 
seek  for  some  plan  by  which  the  Maori  tribes  should  cleave 
together,  so  that  the  people  might  become  one,  like  the 
Pakehas.  I  looked  at  your  books,  where  Israel  cried  to> 
have  a  king  to  themselves,  to  be  a  judge  over  them.'  The; 
result  was  the  setting  up  of  a  young  man  named  Patotau, 
as  King  of  the  Maoris,  in  1857.  His  authority  was  tolerated 
by  the  Government,  and  accepted  by  most  of  the  native 
chiefs,  and  the  consequence  was  a  great  lessening  of  the 
internal  strife  and  rapid  development  of  Maori  strength,  to 
be  applied  either  in  good  ways  or  in  bad. 

Unfortunately  bad  ways  soon  opened  up.  In  1860  a 
quarrel  began  at  Waitara,  in  the  province  of  Taranaki, 
owing  to  the  sale  of  some  land  by  a  native  contrary  to  the 
wishes  of  his  chief,  Wirimu  Tamihana.  The  settler's  title 
was  investigated  and  reported  to  be  good,  and  the  land  was 
bought ;  but  when  surveyors  were  sent  to  define  its  boun- 
daries, they  were  stopped  and  driven  back  by  the  chief  and 


Hi' 


\. 


m 

•It 
1. 1 

I't 


ti 


u 


Ml 


I:  '    I 

5  S  ,    ■ 


346 


NEW  ZEALAND  WARFARE. 


his  followers.     They  returned  with  a  party  of  soldiers  to 
protect  them,  and  found  the  natives  in  armed  possession  of 
the  land.     A  scuffle  ensued  ;  and  soon  it  grew  into  a  war. 
Taranaki  was  ravaged  by  the  Maoris,  and  the  English  troops 
were  not  strong  enough  to  follow  them  into  the  mountain 
fastnesses  to  which  they  retired.     Before  a  sufficient  force 
could  be  brought  from  Auckland,  the  whole  machinery  of  the 
Maori  kingdom  was  applied  to  the  fomenting  of  a  general 
rebellion,  and  it  spread  over  the  whole  northern  island.    'In 
1862,'  we  are  told,  '  the  movement  presented  the  following 
features — an  elected  king,  a  very  young  man  of  no  force  of 
character,  surrounded  by  a  few  ambitious  chiefs,  who  formed 
a  little  mock  court,  and  by  a  body-guard  who  kept  him  from 
all  vulgar  contact,  and  even  from  the  inspection  of  Euro- 
peans, except  on  humiliating  terms  ;  entirely  powerless  to 
enforce  among  his  subjects  the  decisions  of  his  magistrates ; 
but  with  an  army,  if  it  might  be  called  so,  of  5,000  to  10,000 
followers,  scattered  over  the  country,  but  organized  so  that 
large  numbers  could  be  concentrated  on  any  one  point  on 
short  notice ;  large  accumulated  supplies  of  food,  of  arms, 
and  ammunition  ;  a  position  in  the  centre  of  the  island  from 
which  a  descent  could  be  made  in  a  few  hours  on  any  of  the 
European  settlements;  the  Queen's  law  set  at  utter  defiance; 
her  magistrates  treated  with  supercilious  contempt ;    her 
writs  torn  to  pieces  and  trampled  underfoot ;  Europeans 
who  had  married  native  women  driven  out  of  the  king's  dis- 
tricts, while  their  wives  and  children  were  taken  from  them, 
unless  they  would  recognise  and  pay  an  annual  tribute  to  tlio 
king.'* 

Perhaps  there  was  fault  on  the  part  of  the  Colonial  G  overn- 
meut  in  insisting  on  the  obnoxious  land-purchase  in  Waitara 
in  1860.  Perhaps  the  king-movement  had  all  along  been  a 
mere  device  for  preparing  a  formidable  rebellion,  and  ought 
not  to  have  been  tolerated  at  starting.  But  on  both  these 
points  it  is  not  easy  to  attach  reasonable  blame  to  the  local 
authorities.     All  that  is  clear  is  that  the  colonists,  who  had 

^  Fox,  'The  War  in  New  Zealand,'  pp.  30,  31. 


!■  ■    I 
ill 


FIGHTING  BETWEEN  1862  AND  1864. 


347 


long  thought  their  position  secure,  found  themselves  sur- 
prised by  a  powerful  organization  which  they  had  no  means 
of  at  once  putting  down.  They  were  forced  to  make  an 
ignominious  truce  with  the  insurgents  in  18G2,  which  was 
followed  by  a  full  and  insolent  outburst  of  war  in  1863. 

The  colonists  had  feebly  prepared  to  meet  future  dangers. 
The  Maoris  needed  no  preparation.     In  April,  1863,  they 
renewed  their  ravages  in  Taranaki.    In  May  they  threatened 
to  invade  Auckland.  Their  march  was  interrupted  by  General 
Cameron,  at  the  head  of  a  small  body  of  troops,  who  repulsed 
them  in  the  open  field  and  hunted  them  through  the  Waikato 
district,  but  was  powerless  in  his  attempts  to  follow  them  to 
their  hiding-places  and  bring  them  into  subjection.     Thus 
nearly  a  year  was  spent.     The  general  character  of  the 
strife  is  shown  in  the  closing  episode  of  the  campaign  in 
Waikato.     '  On  the   30th  of  March,  1864,'  we  are  told, 
'  Brigadier-General  Carey  was  informed  that  the  natives 
were  entrenching  themselves  at  Orakau,  about  three  miles 
from  his  quarters.     After  reconnoitring  their  position,  he 
returned,  and,  collecting  a  force  of  about  a  thousand  men, 
with  three  guns,  he  made  a  night  march,  appearing  before 
the  pah  at  early  daylight,  and  having  so  arranged  the  arrival 
of  his  detachments  from  different  posts  that  from  the  first 
they  surrounded  the  enemy's  position,  and  rendered  escape 
impossible.     The  pah  proved  to  be  a  place  of  great  strength, 
with  the  usual  ditches  and  parapets  of  mere  than  usual 
depth  and  height,  surrounded  by  a  strong  post  .md  rail  fence, 
and  outlying  connected  rifle-pits.     At  first  General  Carey 
attempted  to  storm  the  works  and  take  them  by  a  rush;  but, 
after  three  assaults,  he  wisely  desisted,  and  determined  to 
approach  the  defences  by  sap.   The  number  of  natives  inside 
is  supposed  to  have  been  about  three  hundred,  commanded 
by  Rewi,  the  greatest  fighting  general  of  the  King-party. 
Dui  ing  the  afternoon  a  reinforcement  of  a  hundred  and  fifty 
or  two  hundred  rebels  appeared  in  sight,  evidently  intending 
to  relieve  the  place.     They  advanced  to  the  edge  of  a  bush, 
about  nine  hundred  yards  in  the  rear  of  our  outposts,  but  there 


1 1 


!t    ' 


li' 


r;:   I 


1/ 


11 


ill  Ss-' 


<% 


\il 


ll 


u 


'  ,     mi  . 

■il 

ill 


ii 


f. 


1 


348 


NE IV  ZEALAND  WARFARE. 


they  stopped  and  commenced  firing  harmless  volleys,  at  the 
same  time  endeavouring  to  encourage  their  friends  by  dancing,' 
tlie  war-dance  and  yelling.  In  the  meantime  reinforcements 
kept  arriving  on  our  side,  which  brought  up  our  number  *o 
over  two  thousand  men,  who  were  so  disposed  that  the  escape 
of  the  beleaguered  Maoris  seemed  to  be  absolutely  impossible. 
All  that  day  and  the  following  night  heavy  firing  was  kept 
up  on  both  sides.  Not  less  than  40,000  rounds  of  cartridgen 
were  served  out  to  our  troops.  By  the  morning  of  the  'ind 
of  April  the  sap  was  pushed  close  up  to  the  works,  and 
hand-grenades  were  thrown  into  the  entrenchments.  The 
Armstrong  guns  were  brought  into  play,  silencing  the  fire  ot 
the  enemy  to  a  great  extent.  Genci'al  Cameron  now  arrived 
on  the  ground,  but  did  not  interfere  with  the  direction  ol 
operations.  As  it  was  well  known,  however,  that  there  were 
many  women  and  children  inside,  he  sent  an  interpreter  to 
tell  them  that  if  they  would  \  .render  their  lives  would  1)6 
spared.  Their  reply  was,  "  This  is  the  word  of  the  Maori : 
we  will  fight  for  ever,  and  ever,  and  ever."  They  were  then 
urged  to  send  out  the  women  and  children.  They  answered, 
"  The  women  will  fight  as  well  as  we."  Then  the  firing  re- 
commenced. Our  troops  were  now  getting  desperate.  Three 
attempts  at  a  hand-to-hand  encounter  were  made,  but  with- 
out success.  It  was  now  four  o'clock  of  the  third  day, 
during  which  the  Maoris  had  had  no  food  but  a  few  raw 
potatoes,  and  not  a  drop  of  water  ;  while  the  shower  of 
grape,  hand-grenades,  and  rifle-balls  poured  with  more  and 
more  effect  into  their  entrenchments.  Suddenly,  on  that 
side  of  the  works  which  was  supposed  to  be  closely  invested 
by  a  double  line  of  the  40th  Kegimeut,  the  whole  Maori  force 
was  seen  to  be  escaping.  Before  they  knew  that  the  Maoris 
were  out,  it  is  said,  they  jumped  over  their  heads,  and  broke 
away  for  a  neighbouring  swamp  and  scrub.  Here  they  might 
all  have  escaped  in  a  body  but  for  a  small  corps  of  cavalry 
and  artillery,  which  got  ahead  and  met  them  just  as  they 
emerged  from  the  swamp  and  scrub,  and  did  great  execu- 
tion.    The  natives  afterwards  acknowledged  a  loss  of  two 


EH  ' 


MAORI  SOLDIERSHIP. 


349 


hundred.  Our  casualties  amounted  to  sixtueu  killed  and 
fifty- two  wounded.'* 

Of  that  sort  was  nearly  all  the  fighting  ;  a  vast  expendi- 
ture of  energy  being  required  to  bring  about  a  very  small 
result,  which  left  the  enemy  almost  as  strong  as  ever. 
There  were  more  battles — one  of  chem,  at  To  Ranga,  being 
more  than  ordinarily  successful — in  18G3  ;  and  in  18o4  there 
was  a  lu-1  in  the  contest.  In  1865  it  was  revived  ;  but  so 
formidable  was  the  action  of  the  English  troops,  aided  by 
friendly  natives,  that,  before  the  year  closed,  peace  was 
supposed  to  be  restored.  The  peace,  however,  was  followed 
by  a  course  of  guerilla  warfare,  maintained  during  four  years 
or  more.  In  the  second  half  of  1868  and  the  first  half  of 
1869  it  was  reckoned  that  about  two  hundred  and  sixty 
insurgents,  out  of  something  over  a  thousand  in  arms,  were 
put  to  death.  The  losses  were  supplied,  in  part  at  any  rate, 
by  fresh  recruits  from  the  neutral  or  secretly  disaffected 
tribes  ;  but  as  their  supply  of  strong  men  was  limited,  and 
by  reason  of  the  gradual  dying  out  of  the  natives  through 
causes  with  which  the  war  had  nothing  to  do,  the  strife 
gradually  subsided,  though  the  increasing  atrocity  of  dis- 
position shown  by  those  who  carried  on  the  fight  caused 
its  final  years  to  be  attended  by  horrors  wholly  dispropor- 
tioned  to  the  extent  of  the  war  and  the  relative  strength  of 
the  combatants. 

A  dying  outburst  of  savage  fury  and  fanaticism  appeared 
in  the  latest  development  of  the  king-movement,  known  as 
the  Pai-Marire  or  Hau-Hau  superstition.  It  began  in 
March,  1864,  when  Captain  Lloyd,  of  the  57th  Eegiment, 
with  a  detachment  of  a  hundred  men,  was  defeated  on  the 
Taranaki  Hills,  he  and  eight  others  being  killed.  '  The 
rebels  drank  the  blood  of  those  who  fell,'  we  are  told,  '  and 
cut  off  their  heads,  burying  for  the  time  the  heads  and 
bodies  in  separate  places.  A  few  days  afterwards,  according 
to  thn  native  account,  the  angel  Gabriel  appeared  to  those 
who  had  partaken  of  the  blood,  and,  by  the  medium  oi 

*  Fox,  pp.  97-102. 


"f,   \ 


\ 


^■\ 


ill. 


'V;M:i 


'I 


!) 


niil 


!! 


kl 


350 


NEIV  ZEALAND  WARFARE. 


Captain  Lloyd's  spirit,  ordered  tliat  his   head  siiould  l)o 
exhumed,  cured  in  their  own  way,  and  taken  throughout 
the   length   and  breadth  of  New  Zealand,  and  that  from 
henceforth  this  head  should  be  the  medium  of  man's  com- 
munication  with  Jehovah.     These  injunctions  wore  carefully 
obeyed,  and  immediately  the  head  was  taken  up  it  com- 
municated  in  the  most  solemn  way  the  tenets  of  this  new 
religion,  namely  :  The  followers  shall  be  called  "  Pal  Marire." 
The  angel  Gabriel,  with  his  legions,  will  protect  them  from 
their  enemies.     The  Virgin  Mary  will  constantly  be  present 
with   them.     The   religion  of  England,  as  taught  by  the 
Scriptures,  is  false.     The   Scriptures  must  all  be  burnt. 
All  days  are  alike  sacred,  and  no  notice  must  be  taken  of 
the  Christian  Sabbath.     Men  and  women  must  live  together 
promiscuously,  so  that  their  children  may  be  as  the  sand 
of  the  sea-shore  for  multitude.     The  priests  have   super- 
human power,  and  can  obtain  for  their  followers  complete 
victory   by   uttering    vigorously  the   word   "  Hau."      The 
people  who  adopt  this  religion  will  shortly  drive  the  whole 
European  population  out  of  New  Zealand.     This  is  only 
prevented  now  by  the  head  not  having  completed  its  circuit 
of  the  whole  land.     Legions  of  angels  await  the  bidding  of 
the  priests  to  aid  the  Maoris  in  exterminating  the  Europeans. 
Immediately  the  Europeans  are  destroyed  and  driven  away, 
men  will  be  sent  from  heaven  to  teach  the  Maoris  all  the 
arts  and  sciences  now  known  by  Europeans.'     *  These  vrere 
the  fivst  developments   of    the   Pai   Marire  or  Hau-Hau 
fanaticism.     Its  emissaries   were  sent  into  every  part  of 
the  islands,  and  their  creed,  which  was  framed  on  the  con- 
venient principle  of  embodying  something  from  most  other 
creeds,  spread  like  wild-fire  ;  its  votaries  apparently  adding 
new  articles  to  it  to  meet  the  growing  furor  of  their  disciples. 
A  large  infusion  of    Judaism,   some    leading  features  of 
Mormonism,  a  little  mesmerism,  a  touch  of  spiritualism, 
occasional  ventriloquism,  and  a  large  amount  of  cannibalism, 
are  the  characteristic  features  which  it  exhibits.     Its  rites 
are  bloody,  sensual,  foul,  and  devilish ;  the  least  reprehen- 


THE  END  OF  THE  STRUGGLE. 


35» 


lese  were 


siblo  aiul  most  orderly  consisting  in  running  round  a  polo 
stuck  in  the  ground,  howling  and  uttering  gibberish,  till 
catalepsy  prostrates  the  worshippers,  who  sometimes  lie 
senseless  on  the  ground  for  hours.  Their  bitterest  hatred 
and  most  refined  cruelties  are  reserved  for  the  missionaries, 
who  are  accused  of  robbing  them  of  their  lands  by  tribes 
which  never  sold,  gave  away,  or  were  deprived  of  an  acre.'* 
The  absurdity  of  this  new  religion  prevented  it  from  being 
adopted  by  any  but  the  most  degraded  of  the  Maoris.  Of 
these,  however,  there  were  then,  and  continued  to  be,  a 
largo  proportion  among  the  scanty  numbers  remaining. 

Since  1869  but  little  open  resistance  has  been  offered  by 
the  Maoris  to  English  rule  in  New  Zealand,  and  there  has 
been  some  improvement  in  their  condition.  In  1881  it  was 
estimated  that  there  were  still  about  44,000  of  them,  nearly 
all  of  whom  were  living  in  the  interior  of  the  North  Island, 
and  especially  in  the  rocky  peninsula  to  its  extreme  north, 
where  they  could  be  almost  free  from  intercourse  with  the 
English  community.  '  The  Maoris,'  says  a  missionary  of 
long  experience,  *  are  a  people  of  great  capacity,  and  open 
to  civilizing  influences.  They  can  learn  anything  to  which 
they  choose  to  apply  themselves.  They  are  very  indepen- 
dent, and  live  apart  from  the  settlers  in  their  own  villages. 
For  the  purposes  of  trade,  politics  or  pleasure,  they  come 
into  the  town,  but  few  of  them  live  there.  They  are  still 
the  owners  of  millions  of  acres  of  land,  and  are  very  jealous 
of  their  rights.  Colonization,  as  might  have  been  expected, 
has  affected  them  with  new  vices,  and  especially  that  of 
drunkenness.  Many  are  on  the  electoral  roll,  and  six  of  them 
have  seats  in  the  Colonial  Legislature — four  in  the  Lower 
and  two  in  the  Upper  House.  They  acquit  themselves 
creditably.  Notwithstanding  the  hindrances  springing  out 
of  political  complications  and  repeated  hostilities,  with  the 
revival  of  superstition  in  some  places,  they  have,  upon  the 
whole,  made  great  advance  in  the  pathway  of  civilization. 't 

*  Fox,  pp.  127-129,  139,  140. 

f  Buller,  '  New  Zealand,  Past  and  Present,'  pp.  38-40. 


I  ! 


I   ! 


i! 


ii,'  :'i 


:     'M 


\\\. 


.:^!.:  i 


M  in 


111 


\ 
ill 


.      ii 


f 

t 

'm 

• 

I  11  '  ! 


.  '1 


III' 
111' 


35- 


NEW  y.EALAND  WARFARE. 


Other  observers,  however,  take  a  gloomier  view  of  the 
situation.     *  The  Maori  warrior,  before  the  Enghsh  landed 
in  New  Zealand,'   says  one,  '  was  brave,  honourable  and 
chivalrous ;  fire-water  had  not  taught  him  the  delights  of 
getting  drunk ;    and   the   fragments   which   survive  of  his 
poetry  touch  all  the  notes  of  imaginative  humanity — the 
lover's  passion,  the  grief  for  the  dead,  the  fierce  delight  of 
battle,  the  calm  enjoyment  of  a  sunlit  landscape,  or  the 
sense  of  a  spiritual  preserver  in  storm  or  earthquake,  or  the 
star-spangled  midnight  sky.     The  germ  of  every  feeling  is 
to  be  found  there  which  has  been  developed  in  Europe  into 
the  finest   literature  and  art ;  and   the  Maori  man  and 
Maori  woman  do  not  seem  to  have  derived  much  benefit 
from   the   introduction  of  "  the  blessings  of   civilization." 
Their  interest  now  is  in  animal  sloth  and  animal  indulgence, 
and  they  have  no  other  ;  the  man  as  if  he  had  nothing  else 
left  to  work  for  or  care  for ;   the  woman  counting  it  an 
honour   to   bear   a   half-caste  child.     It  is  with  the  wild 
races  of  human  beings   as  with  wild  animals,  and  birds, 
and  trees,   and  plants.     Those  only  will  survive  who  can 
domesticate  themselves  into  servants  of  the  modern  forms 
of  social  development.     The  lion  and  the  leopard,  the  eagle 
and  the  hawk,   every  creature  of   earth  or   air,  which  is 
wildly  free,  dies  off  or  disappears  ;  the  sheep,  the  ox,  the 
horse,  the  ass,  accepts  his  bondage,  and  thrives  and  multi- 
plies.     So   it   is  with   man.      The   negro   submits   to  the 
conditions,   becomes   useful,   and   rises   to  a  higher  level. 
The  Ked  Indian  and  the  Maori  pine  away  as  in  a  cage, 
sink  first  into   apathy  and  moral  degradation,  and  then 
vanish.'* 

*  Froude,  'Oceana,'  pp.  257,  258. 


r 


t^'    !i! 


:i  I 


view  of  thd 
dish  landed 
Durable  and 
delights  of 
rvive  of  his 
iianity — the 
je  delight  of 
jape,  or  the 
uake,  or  the 
ry  feeling  is 
Europe  into 
ri   man  and 
nuch  benefit 
civilization." 
,1  indulgence, 
nothing  else 
lunting  it  an 
ith  the  wild 
3,  and  birds, 
ive  who  can 
lodern  forms 
d,  the  eagle 
lir,  which  is 
the  ox, the 
s  and  multi- 
)mits  to  the 
higher  level. 
IS  iu  a  cage, 
n,  and  then 


CHAPTER  XXXI. 


MODERN   NEW   ZEALAND. 


POLITICAL  HISTORY  OF  THF  COLONV — ITS  RECENT  DEVELOPMENT — ITS  PRESENT 
CONDITION   AND   CAPABILITIES.      [1868-1888.] 

EW  ZEALAND,  in  which  till  1839  traders  and 
missionaries  had  been  free  to  do  all  the  good 
or  ill  they  could  or  cared  for,  without  inter- 
ference from  English  rulers,  was  a  sort  of  pro- 
vince or  dependency  of  New  South  Wales 
between  1840  and  1853,  its  affairs  being  administered  suc- 
cessively by  Captain  Hobson,  Captain  Fitzroy,  and  Sir 
George  Grey.  In  1853  it  was  established  as  a  separate 
colony,  with  representative  institutions  of  its  own,  which 
have  since  been  considerably  altered ;  but  its  early  years  of 
freedom  were  full  of  disturbance.  The  colonists  in  the 
different  provinces  quarrelled  with  one  another,  as  well  as 
with  the  Maoris,  and  the  gold-discoveries  brought  all  their 
customary  encouragements  to  disoi  der ;  and  the  colony 
fared  ill — though  its  trade  and  population  increased — under 
Colonel  Gore-Browne,  its  first  independent  govei-nor,  who 
held  the  office  from  1855  to  1861.  Sir  Gc^orge  Grey,  as  the 
fittest  man  to  improve  matters,  was  then  reinstated,  and, 
in  spite  of  many  troubles,  groat  advances  were  made 
between  1861  and  1868,  wlicn  he  was  succeeded  by  Sir 
George  Bowen.  With  tlint  event  the  niodciu  history  of 
New  Zealand  commences, 

23 


ii.  I  r 


I'll 


„:l. 
Il'i     '■ 


yAi 


fjil! 


fill: 


,1' 


:i:   Pi:5: 


'    M 


354 


MODERN  NEW  ZEALAND. 


Under  its  new  constitution  the  governor  of  the  colony 
was  aided,  as  in  New  South  Wales,  by  a  Legislative  Council, 
the  members  of  which  were  appointed  by  the  Crown  for 
life,  and  also  by  a  House  of  Eepresentatives,  elected  for 
three  years  under  a  franchise  equivalent  to  household 
suffrage.  The  old  provincial  system  of  local  gc-ernment, 
after  much  unhappy  experience,  was  abolished  in  1875, 
when  the  three  islands  were  divided  into  sixty-threo 
counties,  each  controlled  for  local  purposes  by  its  own 
council,  with  municipal  corporations  for  the  townships, 
and  all  being  subject  to  the  central  authority,  the  seat  of 
which  was  transferred  in  1865  from  Auckland,  near  the 
north  of  the  more  populous  part  of  the  North  Island,  to 
Wellington,  on  its  north-western  extremity. 

Sir  George  Grey,  who  did  much  to  win  the  confidence  of 
the  Maoris,  while  dealing  sternly  with  them  on  occasion, 
had,  during  his  second  term  of  office,  nearly  settled,  so  far 
as  it  could  be  settled,  the  long-standing  quarrel  between  the 
colonists  and  the  natives  as  to  the  possession  of  the  land.  In 
his  time  the  bulk  of  the  country  was  appropriated  by  the 
Crown,  or  assigned  to  the  white  c]  ;mants;  but  many  parts 
were  recovered  for  the  Maoris  and  guaranteed  to  them. 
The  way  was  thus  prepared  for  the  great  encouragement  of 
public  works  to  which  Sir  George  Bowen  zealously  applied 
himself  during  his  governorship,  from  1868  to  1873,  about 
£19,000,000  being  thus  spen'  ir"  those  years  ;  and  the  same 
policy  was  as  lavishly  continued  under  some  of  his  suc- 
cessors, of  whom  the  most  eminent  were  Sir  Hercules 
Eobinson  and  Sir  Arthur  Gordon,  before  the  appointment  of 
Sir  Wilham  Drummond  Jervois  in  1883.  The  chief  pro- 
moter of  this  policy,  as  adviser  of  the  governors,  was  Sir 
Julius  Vogel,  whose  popularity  with  the  more  enterprising 
colonists  dates  from  1870.  The  public  debt  of  New  Zealand, 
incurred  for  the  construction  of  roads,  railways,  harbours, 
and  other  works — which,  it  was  reckoned,  would  yield  ample 
profits  hereafter— amounted  to  £37,587,776  in  1886;  and 
whether  all  this  expenditure  was  wise  or  not,  it  was  in  many 


ITS  RECENT  DEVELOPMENT. 


555 


bhe  colony 
VQ  Couucil, 
Crown  for 
elected  for 
household 
D'ernment, 
d  in  1875, 
sixty-threo 
)y   its  own 
townships, 
the  seat  of 
1,  near  the 
,  Island,  to 

)nfidence  of 
)n  occasion, 
ttled,  so  far 
between  the 
^e  land.    In 
,ted  by  the 
many  parts 
d  to  them, 
agement  of 
usly  applied 
873,  about 
id  the  same 
of  his  suc- 
Herciiles 
lointment  of 
chief  pro- 
)rs,  was  Sir 
enterprising 
ew  Zealand, 
s,  harbours, 
yield  ample 
1886;  and 
ras  in  many 


ir 


ways  helpful.  '  I  knew  the  country  when  it  was  in  a  state 
of  nature,  without  a  road,  or  a  bridge,  or  a  vehicle,'  said  an 
old  resident  in  1880.  '  In  those  days  our  journeys  were 
necessarily  made  on  foot,  excepting  where  boat  or  canoe 
answered  our  purpose.  Old  war-paths  through  the  other- 
wise trackless  forests  were  our  public  highways.  We  could 
travel  only*  in  single  file,  stumbling  every  now  and  then  over 
the  matted  roots  of  trees  or  fallen  trunks.  In  the  open  we 
enjoyed  the  daylight  which  faintly  found  its  way  through 
the  umbrageous  woods,  where  also  we  followed  the  same 
narrow  trackways,  leaving  every  here  and  there  to  ford  a 
swamp  or  dash  across  a  river.  The  only  accommodation  was 
that  of  a  Maori  hut  or  a  small  calico  tent  which  the  traveller 
carried  with  him.  Fish  and  potatoes  made  up  the  bill  of 
fare  which  awaited  him  on  arriving  at  a  Maori  villag.. .  All 
this  is  altered  now.  For  long  distances  w^e  have  roads  as 
good  as  any  in  England,  and  the  rivers  are  spanned  with 
substantial  bridges  wherever  there  is  much  traffic.  There 
are  railways  open  over  1,200  miles ;  long  lines  are  in  course 
of  being  laid  down,  and  ere  very  long  the  entire  colony  will 
be  traversed  by  the  iron-horse.  Coaches  are  running,  where 
as  yet  there  are  no  railways,  in  all  the  peopled  districts,  and 
there  is  no  place  whatever  where  horses  cannot  be  used.  The 
natives  themselves  travel  on  horseback,  and  it  is  no  uncommon 
thing  to  meet  a  cavalcade  of  from  ten  to  fifty  of  them,  with 
their  trappings,  all  mounted.  In  the  early  days  of  our 
colonial  history,  our  towns  were  little  more  than  misshaped 
collections  of  tents,  huts,  and  shanties.  The  streets,  so- 
called,  were  quagmires  in  wet  weather.  Delicate  ladies  did 
not  despise  a  bullock -cart  as  a  means  of  locomotion.  But 
what  do  we  ^ee  now?  Beautiful  cities,  containing  from 
20,000  to  35,000  people  in  each  ;  well-paved  streets,  lighted 
with  gas,  crowded  with  vehicles  of  all  kinds,  which  compare 
favourably  with  those  in  the  best  English  towns.  There 
are  many  smaller  towns  with  a  population  ranging  from 
2,000  to  7,000.  There  are  fifteen  towns  with  from  1,000  to 
2,000  inhabitants  in  each ;  and  besides  these  there  are  forty 

23—2 


I 


1  rl 


.il" 


'IV 


35^ 


MODERN  NEW  ZEALAND. 


;!! 


i':ll 


!     I 


':.i 


•I 

')  ^' 

ii 


I 


\ 


!  f  -  ■ 


!'l 


more  with  from  100  to  500.  In  some  of  the  larger  towns 
steam-trams  are  used.  Museums,  libraries,  mechanics' 
institutes,  etc.,  are  found  in  all  of  them.  Public  parks, 
gardens,  and  show-grounds  are  also  provided.'* 

The  first  English  visitors  to  New  Zealand  found  there 
plenty  of  birds  and  fishes,  but  no  other  animals  except  dogs, 
rats,  bats,  and  lizards.  It  is  to  European  colonization  that 
it  owes  its  sheep,  cattle,  and  horses,  its  domestic  poultry 
and  forest  game.  Some  few  importations  have  been  un- 
fortunate, especially  that  of  the  rabbit,  which  here,  as  in 
Australia,  has  grown  into  a  pest.  But  from  others,  and 
especially  from  the  sheep  introduced,  great  advantage  has 
been  derived.  Of  the  latter  there  were  more  than  14,000,000 
in  the  colony  in  1881,  yielding  wool  for  export  which  was 
valued  at  £3,267,312,  as  well  as  mutton,  then  chiefly  wasted; 
though  since  the  arrangements  for  sending  it  in  a  frozen 
condition  to  European  markets  have  been  to  some  extent 
developed  it  has  become  somewhat  of  a  lucrative  industry. 
Except  as  regards  its  gold,  the  mineral  resources  of  New 
Zealand,  including  copper  as  well  as  iron  anc^.  coal,  have  as 
yet  been  little  used,  and  the  same  may  be  sail  of  its  wealth 
in  timber.  Sufficient  progress  had  been  made,  however,  to 
enable  the  white  population  to  rise,  partly  by  assisted 
emigration,  from  218,668  in  1867  to  489,938  in  1881,  and  to 
nearly  600,000  in  1887.  The  majority  of  these  were  in  the 
South  or  Middle  Island,  where  the  provinces  of  Canterbury 
and  Otago,  with  about  45,000  inhabitants  in  each  of  their 
chief  towns,  Christchurch  and  Dunedin,  are  the  most 
prosperous  of  all,  though  Auckland,  with  a  population  of 
nearly  60,000,  maintains  its  traditions  as  the  capital  of  the 
thriving  North  Island. 

The  extent  of  the  three  islands  from  north  to  south  being 
about  1,100  miles,  \\ith  an  average  breadth  of  only  140, 
their  splendid  seaboard  enjoys  wide  differences  of  tempera- 
l^urc.  *  The  climate,'  it  was  said  in  1885,  *  ranges  from  that 
of  Naples  in  the  Bay  of  Islands,  to  that  of  Scotland  at 
*  J3uller,  '  New  Zealand,  Past  and  Present,'  pp.  SO,  8'2.  %'i. 


' 


i"         ■    ! 


'ger  towns 
mechanics' 
olio  parks, 

)und  there 
Kcept  dogs, 
zatiou  that 
tic  poultry 
3  been  un- 
here,  as  in 
Dthers,  and 
autage  has 
14,000,000 
which  was 
jfly  w^asted ; 
in  a  frozen 
ome  extent 
TB  industry, 
pes  of  New 
al,  have  as 
:  its  wealth 
however,  to 
by   assisted 
881,  and  to 
were  in  the 
Canterbury 
Lch  of  their 
the   most 
pulation  of 
ital  of  the 

50uth  being 
only  110, 
)f  tempera- 
Is  from  that 


"COtiUl? 

i-2.  83. 


d  at 


ITS  PRESENT  CONDITION. 


357 


Fovenux  Strait.   There  is  abundant  raiufi^l' •  there  arc  great 
rivers,    mountains,    volcanoes,   a    soil    luxuriantly   rich,   a 
splenuxd   clothing   of    magnificent   forest.      So   far   as   the 
natural  features  of  a  country  tend  to  produce  a  fine  race 
of   men,   New   Zealand    has  the   advantage   of    Australia. 
Australia,  too,  has  hills  and  rivers,  woods  and  fertile  lands, 
but  unless  in  the  heated  plains  of  the  interior,  which  are 
sublime  in  their  desolation,  it  has  nothing  to  touch  the 
imagination,  nothing  to  develop  varieties  of  character.     In 
New  Zealand  there  are  mountain  ranges  grander  than  the 
giant  bergs  of  Norway  ;  there  are  glaciers  and  waterfalls  for 
the   hardy  hillmen;  there   aro  sheep-walks  for  the  future 
Melibceus  or  shepherd  of  Salisbury  Plain  ;  there  are  rich 
farm-knds  for  the  peasant  yeomen  ;   and  the  coasts,  with 
their  inlets  and  infinite  varieties,  are  a  nursery  for  seamen, 
who  will  carry  forward  the  traditions  of  the  old  laud.     No 
Arden  ever  saw  such  forests,  and  no  lover  ever  carved  his 
mistress's  name  on  such  trees  as  are  scattered  over  the 
Northern  Island  ;  while  the  dullest  intellect  quickens  into 
awe  and  reverence  amidst  volcanoes  and  boiling  spiings,  and 
the  mighty  forces  of  nature,  which  seem  as  if  any  day  they 
might  break  their  chains.     Even  the  Maoris,  a  small  colony 
of  Polynesian  savages,  grew  to  a  stature  of  mind  and  body 
in  New  Zealand  which  no  branch  of   that  race  has  ap- 
proached elsewhere.     If  it  is  written  in  the  book  of  destiny 
that  the  English  nation  has  still  within  it  great  men  who 
will  take  a  place  among  the  demi-gods,  I  can  well  believe 
that  it  will  be  in  the  unexhausted  soil  and  spiritual  capabili- 
ties of  New  Zealand  that  the  great  English  poets,  artists, 
philosophers,  statesmen,  soldiers  of  the  future  will  be  born 
and  nurtured. '■**■ 

Froude,  'Oceana,'  p.  205, 


:  I 


I    ; 


1  ii 


I    I 


w 


u 


CHAPTEE  XXXII. 

FIJI   AND   NEW   GUINEA. 

MISSIONAnY  WOllK  AMONG  THE  FIJIAN'S — KING  THAKOMBAU — ANNEXATION 
OF  FIJI  BY  KNG  LAND— ITS  SUBSEQUENT  CONDITION  — OTHER  ^iNNEXATIGNS 
IN   THE   PACIFIC — BBITISH   NEW   GUINEA.      [1835-1888.] 

BOUT  1,200  miles  to  the  north  of  New  Zealand 
and  some  2,000  to  the  east  of  Queensland  are 
the  two  islands  of  Viti  Levu  and  Vanua  Levii, 
and  upwards  of  two  hundred  smaller  islands, 
many  of  them  merely  rocks  and  reefs,  known  as 
the  Fijian  group,  with  a  total  area  of  less  than  8,000  square 
miles.  Parts  of  this  archipelago  were  visited  by  Tasman, 
during  his  explorations  in  the  Pacific,  in  1643,  and  after- 
wards by  Captain  Cook  and  others  ;  but  no  use  appears  to 
have  been  made  of  it  by  Europeans  till  1804,  when  twenty- 
seven  convicts,  escaping  from  New  South  Wales,  found  their 
way  thither  in  boats,  the  last  of  them,  an  Irishman  named 
Patrick  Connor,  being  alive  in  1835  when  two  Wesleyan 
missionaries,  William  Cross  and  David  Cargill,  went  to 
settle  among  the  natives.  Others  followed,  both  mission- 
aries and  traders,  and  during  more  than  a  generation  the 
history  of  European  influence  in  Fiji  was  in  some  respects, 
but  only  in  some,  very  similar  to  that  of  European  in- 
fluence in  New  Zealand  in  earlier  days. 

The  Fijians  were  a  strange  race  of  savages,  handsome 
and  vigorous  of  body,  and,  as  results  have  proved,  capable 


A  FIELD  FOR  MISSIONARIES. 


359 


of  remarkable  improvement  in  mind,  but  coarse  and  brutal 
in  many  ways,  especially  fond  of  relieving  the  monotony  of 
life,  in  fertile  regions  that  yielded  all  the  ordinary  food  they 
required  with  but  little  labour,  by  intertribal  wars,  of  which 
tlie  crowning  pleasure  consisted  in  eating  the  enemies  they 
had  slaughtered  and  in  fattening  up  their  prisoners  for 
leisurely  consumption.  White  visitors  of  the  worst  types 
could  hardly  degrade  them,  though  they  introduced  to  them 
some  new  vices  ;  but  good  men  found  them  apt  disciples. 
The  Wesleyan  missionaries  achieved  wonders,  and  Eoman 
Catholics  joined  in  the  beneficent  work.  These  apostles 
endeared  themselves  to  the  people  by  teaching  them  several 
useful  arts,  by  curing  their  sick,  and  in  many  other  ways, 
and  in  the  course  of  a  quarter  of  a  century  had  converted 
half  of  the  population  to  forms  of  Christianity  which,  if 
not  in  all  respects  satisfactory  when  judged  by  orthodox 
standards,  effected  a  wonderful  revolution  in  the  habits  of 
the  Fijians. 

The  career  of  Thakombau,  the  famous  chief  who  died  in 
1883,  when  he  was  nearly  eighty,  illustrates  the  work 
wrought  by  the  missionaries.  '  At  the  tender  age  of  six,* 
we  are  told,  '  the  young  Seru.  as  he  was  then  called,  clubbed 
his  first  victim,  a  boy  somewhat  liis  senior.  The  first  fifty 
years  of  his  life  were  passed  in  wars  and  fightings,  and  dis- 
graced by  unspeakable  barbarities,  including  the  strangling 
of  his  father's  five  wives,  after  the  death  of  that  old  mis- 
creant. But  while  still  a  determined  heathen,  he  w^as  not 
altogether  unfriendly  to  the  missionaries,  whose  remon- 
strances he  would  often  endure  while  rejecting  their 
counsels.  Their  teaching  was  strongly  supported  by  his 
wife,  Audi  Lytia,  and  his  daughter,  Andi  Arietta  Kuilla 
(Lady  Harriet  Flag).  The  latter  is  a  woman  of  rnascuhne 
intellect,  who  rules  her  own  district  splendidly,  and  is  the 
king's  best  adviser.  Like  many  another,  however,  Thakom- 
bau turned  a  deaf  ear  to  all  their  arguments  so  long  as  his 
way  was  prosperous.  It  was  not  till  1854,  when  one  tribe 
after  another  had  thrown  off  his  yoke,  and  his  fame  as  a 


■  \ 
i 


!:,' 


I 


m^ 


360 


/'Y//  AND  NEW  GUINEA. 


1^ 


I  ,! 


lii 


i'i 


warrior  was  dimmed,  that  ho  began  to  lose  faith  in  his  own 
gods,   and   to   listen   with   a   more   favourable   ear  to   tha 
counsels  of  the  Christian  King  George  of  Tonga,  who  sent 
him  a  letter  urging   him  to  become  a  worshipper  of  the 
Saviour.      On  the  30th  of  April  he  gave  orders  that  tlie 
great  drums  (which  ten  days  previously  had  been  beaten 
to  call  the  people  to  the  temples  for  a  great  cannibal  feast) 
should   now  sound  to  summon   them  to    assemble  in   the 
great  strangers'  houso  to  worship   the   true   Cind.     About 
three  hundred  met  there,  and  the  Vuni  Valu,  with  all  liis 
wives,  children,  and  other  relations,  knelt  together  in  solemn 
adoration  of  the  Christians'  God.     This  was  a  day  ever  to 
be  remembered  as  one  of  the  most  important  in  the  aimals 
of  Fiji.     But  the  outward  state  of  matters  was  very  un- 
satisfactory.     Thakombau's    implacable    foe,   the  chief  of 
Eewa,  had  acquired  great  power,  and  announced  his  inten- 
tion of  utterly  destroying  Bau,  and  its  king  and  people, 
whom  he  would  soon  eat,  and  proclaimed  that  he  denefj 
their  new  God  to  save  them.     But   at  the  darkest  hour 
came  deliverance.     The  king  of   Eewa  died  of  dysentery. 
His  chiefs  received  Thakombau's  overtures  of  peace  favour- 
ably.    King  George  of  Tonga  came  to  Fiji,  and  somoliow, 
unintentionally,  drifted  into  the  general  war  and  helped  l(j 
bring  it  to  a  speedy  end.     Seventy  towns  returned  to  their 
allegiance  to  Bau,  and  great  was  the  wonder  excited  by  the 
king's  clemency ;  his  whole  aim  being  to  ensure  a  lasting 
peace,  and  to  induce  all  concerned  to  attend  to  the  cultiva- 
tion of  the  land  and  the  interests  of  trade.     All  this  time 
he  had  been  carefully  studying  the  doctrines  of  the  faith  he 
professed  ;  but  in  his  case,  as  in  many  others,  it  was  deemed 
desirable  to  defer  his  baptism  for  a  considerable  period,  tuil 
his  instructors  were  convinced  of  his  being  thoroughly  in 
earnest.      It  was  not  till  January,  1857,  that,  having  dis- 
missed all  his  wives  except  one,  Thakombau  was  pubhcly 
manied  to  Audi  Lytia,  and  they  were  baptized  together. 
From   that   moment   lie   has    taken    no    retrograde    step. 
Always  resolute  in  whatever  line  of  conduct  he  adopted,  he 


Hi. 


in  his  own 

Bar  to  tlio 

,  who  sent 

iper  of  tlie 

s  that  the 

een  beaten 

nibal  feast) 

ble  in   the 

nd.     About 

^'itli  all  his 

!!•  in  soleiini 

lay  ever  to 

tliu  annals 

18  very  un- 

lie  chief  of 

his  inten- 

uifl  people, 

t  he  deiied 

,rke8t  hour 

dysentery. 

ice  favour- 

somohnw, 

helped  lo 

d  to  tbtm- 

ud  by  tlio 

a  laHtin^ 


cultivi 


tie 


this  time 
le  faith  he 
LS  deemed 
period,  till 
.-oughly  m 
Lving  dis- 
publicly 
I  together. 
l,de  step. 
)pted,  he 


f 


A-fNG  THAKOMBAU. 


361 


•  ti 


has  shown  himself  most  truly  so  in  the  promotion  of 
Christianity,  and  of  every  measure  that  promised  to  be  for 
the  good  of  his  people.  Determined  and  energetic  in  his 
relations  to  other  chiefs,  he  has  of  late  thrown  all  his 
influence  on  behalf  of  peace  and  order,  and  now  professes 
himself  well  content  with  the  subordinate  position  he  has 
accepted,  believing  that  he  has  thereby  consulted  the  best 
interests  of  all  his  countrymen.'* 

J3au,  one  of  the  smaller  islands  in  the  Fijian  archipelago, 
but  convenient  for  access  to  most  of  them,  was  a  sort  of 
centre  of  government  under  Thakombau,  in  his  variable 
dominion  over  the  minoi-  chiefs,  and  a  favourite  resort  of 
the  other  foreigners,  besides  missionaries,  who  often  visited 
tlio.'-  e  parts,  some  coming  for  sandal-wood  and  other  native 
liioducts,  others  discerning  their  fitness  for  cotton-growing 
and  the  like  ;  and  in  1859  Thakombau  was  induced  to  make 
II  n  offer  of  the  sovereignty  of  the  whole  group  to  Queen 
V|ctofla.  T|ie  offer,  after  prolonged  inquiry,  was  dechned 
in  )8r)3  ;  Jnit  in  the  same  year  the  dearth  of  cotton,  conse- 
quent on  the  American  Oivil  War,  caused  fresh  attention  to 
bu  directed  to  Fiji,  and  it  began  to  be  frequented  by  many 
Americans,  as  well  as  Australians  and  Englishmen,  over 
whom  it  became  necessary  that  some  sort  of  orderly  govern- 
minit  should  be  established.  A  clumsy  attempt  in  this 
direction  was  made  in  1871,  when  Thakombau  was  per- 
suaded by  the  English  settlors  to  claim  the  title  of  king,  and 
lu  sunnnuii  a  mock  parliament.  This  only  increased  the 
confusion,  and  something  like  a  civil  war  broke  out,  Maafu, 
aiiotlier  powerful  chief,  setting  himself  in  opposition  to 
Tliakombau,  who  thereupon  again  invoked  the  assistance  of 
llii'  I'iliglbll  Crown.  Sir  Hercules  iiubinson,  then  governor 
of  New  South  Wales,  was  consequently  deputed  to  visit 
Fiji  lu  1871,  and  by  arrangement  with  Thakombau,  who 
used  Ills  Influence  with  the  minor  chiefs  to  procure  their 
submlsslolJ,  it  was  formally  taken  possession  of  in  October 
as  an  Ihigllsh  colony. 

*  Oi  Y,  nnrdon  Oiunininy,  '  Al  llniiiit  in  Fiji,'  pp.  114,  115. 


f 


362 


FIJI  AND  NEW  GUINEA. 


\ 


1  1 

1 

\    1 

ii'i-f 

! 

1    w 

-: 

!  .■ 
1    '  ■ 

1    '' 

'!: 

'  '  1  ■ 

il 

j 

: 

1     ! 
i;,    ! 
1     ■ 

< 

^^  . 

t 

. 

■^ 

1 

■^ 

., 

'  Any  Fijian  chief  who  refuses  to  cede  cannot  have  much 
wisdom,*  said  tlie  shrewd  old  warrior  at  an  assembly  of  the 
heads  of  the  people  convoked  to  sanction  the  transfer.  '  Jf 
matters  remain  a,s  they  are,  Fiji  will  become  like  a  piece  of 
drift-wood  on  the  sea,  and  be  picked  up  by  the  first  passer- 
by. The  whites  who  have  come  to  Fiji  are  a  bad  lot ;  they 
are  mere  stalkers  on  the  beach.  Of  one  thing  I  am  assured, 
if  we  do  not  cede  Fiji,  the  white  stalkers  on  the  beach,  the 
cormorants,  will  open  their  maws  and  swallow  us.  The 
white  residents  are  going  about  influencing  the  minds  of  tlio 
chiefs,  so  as  to  prevent  annexation,  fearing  that  in  case 
order  is  established  a  period  may  be  put  to  their  lawless 
proceedings.  By  annexation  the  two  races,  white  and 
black,  will  be  bound  together,  and  it  will  be  impossible  to 
sever  them.  The  interlacing  has  come.  Fijians,  as  a 
nation,  are  of  an  unstable  character  ;  and  a  white  man  who 
wishes  to  get  anything  out  of  a  Fijian,  if  he  does  not 
succeed  in  his  object  to-day,  will  try  again  to-morrow,  until 
the  Fijian  is  either  wearied  out  or  overpowered,  and  gives 
in.  But  law  will  bind  us  together,  and  the  stronger  nation 
will  lend  stability  to  the  weaker.'* 

The  addition  thus  made  to  the  British  dominions,  perhaps 
inevitable,  soon  proved  to  be  beneficial  to  all  parties ;  but 
the  change  was  attended  by  a  great  disaster.  Before  Sir 
Arthur  Gordon  arrived,  as  the  first  governor,  in  January, 
1875,  a  terrible  plague  of  measles — hitherto  unknown  in 
these  islands — had  attacked  the  natives,  and  by  it,  it  was 
reckoned,  nearly  a  third  of  the  population  of  about  150,000 
was  destroyed.  The  disease  was  introduced  by  Thakombau 
himself,  who  had  gone  to  Sydney  with  his  family  on  a 
visit  to  Sir  Hercules  Eobinson,  and  who  had  a  mild  attack 
of  it  on  his  voyage  home.  *  Vassals  and  kindred,'  we  are 
told,  *  came  from  all  parts  of  the  group  to  receive  him,  and, 
according  to  custom,  fervently  sniffed  his  hand  or  his  face, 
thereby  breathing  the  unsuspected  poison.'  A  few  days 
afterwards  there  was  a  great  gathering  of  the  mountain 
*  C.  F.  Gordon  Gumming,  '  At  Home  in  Fiji,'  p.  2. 


FIJI  AS  AN  ENGLISH  COLONY. 


^(^l 


have  mucli 
iiiibly  of  the 
ausfer.  '  Jf 
ko  a  piece  of 
first  paBser- 
tid  lot ;  they 
am  assured, 
e  beach, the 
»w  us.  The 
minds  of  tho 
that  in  case 
iheir  lawless 
,  white  and 
mpossible  to 
'ijians,  as  a 
ite  man  who 
he  does  not 
Qorrow,  until 
pd,  and  gives 
onger  nation 

!ons,  perhaps 
parties;  but 
Before  Sir 
in  January, 
unknown  in 
by  it,  it  was 
out  150,000 
Thakombau 
[family  on  a 
mild  attack 
red,'  we  are 
e  him,  and, 
or  his  face, 
A  few  days 
e  mountain 
2. 


tribes,  and  as  this  was  attended  by  some  who  had  cauf^ht 
tho  malady  but  were  not  ycL  stricken  down  by  it,  tho  in- 
fection was  spread  far  and  wide.  '  Of  course,  it  was  only 
natural  that  the  people  should  attrilnite  this  to  poison  or 
witchcraft,  and  that  the  tribes  who  had  only  recently 
accepted  Christianity,  or  were  on  the  eve  of  doing  so,  siiould 
conclude  that  it  was  a  heaven-sent  punisliincnt  for  forsaliiug 
the  gods  of  their  fathers,  and  giving  up  thei]-  lands  to  the 
white  men.  So  they  retreated  to  their  mountain  strong- 
holds, banished  their  teachers,  returned  to  heathenism,  and 
openly  repudiated  the  recently  accepted  British  rule.'* 

There  is  evidence  of  the  simple-mindedness  of  theFijians 
in  the  readiness  with  which,  when  the  panic  caused  by  the 
plague  of  measles  had  subsided,  they  submitted  to  British 
rule.  Sir  Arthur  Gordon,  choosing  Levuka,  on  another 
small  island,  nea)-  to  Ban,  as  the  seat  of  government,  soon 
established  English  authority  over  the  whole  archipelago ; 
and  this  has  been  steadily  increased  since  1880,  when  Suva, 
on  the  north-eas*^  of  Viti  Levu,  the  largest  i^lnid,  was  made 
the  capital,  in  lieu  of  Levuka,  on  Sir  George  Des  Voeux'a 
succession  to  the  governorship. 

The  white  population,  whicli  was  1,683  when  the  EngHsh 
supremacy  began  in  1876,  was  about  2,000  in  1879,  und  had 
risen  to  3,500  by  the  end  of  1884.  The  Fijians,  esthnated 
at  200,000  in  1859,  had  dwindled  down  to  about  150,000  in 
1874,  before  the  fatal  epidemic  reduced  them  to  something 
like  100,000,  and  in  1884  there  were  not  more  than  115,000. 
The  total  was  increased,  however,  by  about  8,000  Polyne- 
sians and  coolies,  brought  over  on  a  three  years'  agreement 
to  assist  in  the  cultivation  of  the  land. 

The  philanthropy  of  this  importation  of  foreign  labour — 
in  the  nature  of  modified  slavery,  and  apt  to  be  injurious  to 
the  men  employed — is  questionable  ;  but  it  was  found  useful 
in  developing  the  resources  of  Fiji.  For  the  production  of 
sugar  and  coffee,  as  well  as  cocoa-nut  oil,  cotton,  maize, 
various  fruits  and  nuts,  fibres  and  much  else,  the  islands 
*  C.  F.  Gordon  Cummmg,  '  At  Home  in  Fiji,'  p.  32. 


Ml 


!  :\  t' 


'i  'I 


IMAGE  EVALUATION 
TEST  TARGET  (MT-3) 


k 


A 


{./ 


^  .^. 


'/. 


„v 


^ 


T 
I 


4s^ 


V. 


^ 


1.0 


I.! 


IM 


U,  1^ 


1^ 


■  2.2 

^   1^    12.0 


L25  mil  1.4 


II 
I 


^ 


'/ 


Hiotographic 

Sciences 
Corporation 


33  WEST  MAIN  STREET 

WEBSTER,  N.Y.  )4580 

(716)  872-4S03 


^< 


iV 


<F 


o\ 


rT"^"v"*> 


fi 


\u 


II  ' 


;» 

') 

5! 


It 


364 


F///  AXD  NEW  GUINEA. 


are  well  adapted,  and  its  exports  rose  from  £94,206  in  ISTj 

to  .(;;m5,mm  ill  iHsi. 

Tile  policy  of  annexation  in  tlie  Pacific,  much  favouieil 

by  tlie  Australians  on  political  even  more  than  on  com- 

mercip]  ^'rounds,  and  more  excusable  in  the  case  of  the  Fiji 

islands  than  in  some  others,  has  been  systematically  extended 

since  1874.     The  small  island  of  Eotumah,  about  800  miles 

to  the  north  of  Fiji,  was  taken  possession  of,  '  at  the  request 

of  the  native  chiefs,'  and  included  in  Sir  Arthur  Gordon's 

government,  in  1879;  and  before  that,  in  1877,  the  Governor 

of  Fiji,  for  the  time  being,  had   been   constituted   '  Higli 

Commissioner  in,  over,  and  for  the  Western  Pacific  Islands, 

for  the  purpose  of  better  carrying  out  the  provisions  of  the 

Pacific  Islanders'  Protection  Acts,  1872  and  1875,  and  to 

provide  a  civil  court  for  the  settlement  of  disputes  between 

British  subjects  living  in  these  islands.'     This  functionary's 

jurisdiction,  possibly  useful,  but  liable  to  abuse  in  promoting 

opportunities  for  aggression,  extends  ovci.-  'all  islands  in  the 

Western  Pacific  not  being  within  the  limits  of  the  colonies 

of  Fiji,  Queensland  or  New  South  Wales,  and  not  being 

within  the  jurisdiction  of  any  civilized  power,'  and  includes 

'  that  part  of  New  Guinea  which  is  eastward  of  the  ll:5rd 

meridian   of    longitude,   New   Britain,    New   Ireland,   the 

Louisade   Archipelago,  the   Solomon  Islands,  the  Tongau 

or  Friendly  Islands,  the  Samoan  or  Navigators'  Islands, 

and  the  various  small  groups  of  Melanesia.' 

By  far  the  most  important  item  in  that  comprehensive 
list,  the  eastern  half  of  New  Guinea,  was  taken  out  of  the 
High  Commissioner's  jurisdiction,  and  assigned  as  a  new 
colony  to  the  custody  of  a  special  commission  in  November, 
1884. 

New  Guinea,  about  a  fourth  of  the  size  of  Australia,  and 
separated  from  its  northern  extremity  by  Torres  Strait,  was 
formerly  claimed  by  the  Dutch,  who  planted  a  few  settle- 
ments on  its  western  shores  in  connection  with  their  East 
Indian  possessions.  It  was  also  claimed  by  the  English 
East  Indian  Company  in  1793,  when  a  show  of  uv,3upatioii 


ENCROACHMENTS  IN  NEW  GUINEA. 


365 


2G6  in  18T.J 

;h  favoured 
Ln  oil  com- 
of  the  Fiji 
ily  extended 
it  800  niilo-; 
the  request 
ir  Gordon's 
10  Governor 
ited   'High 
ific  Islands, 
sions  of  the 
875,  and  to 
bcs  between 
luctionary's 
1  promoting 
lands  in  the 
[the  colonies 
\  not  being 
,nd  includes 
E  the  liard 
reland,    tiie 
he  Tongau 
Irs'  Islands, 

iprehensivc 
out  of  the 
as  a  new 

I  November, 

stralia,  and 
(Strait,  was 
Ifew  settle- 
their  East 
(le  English 
lo^cupation 


was  made  by  a  detachment  of  troops.  Though  it  was 
occasionally  visited  by  explorers,  there  was,  however,  no 
interference  with  its  natives — roughly  estimated  at  from 
two  to  five  millions  in  number,  that  is,  from  eight  to  twenty 
for  each  square  mile — till  1871,  when  some  missionaries 
settled  near  Port  Moresby,  on  the  south-eastern  coast. 
'  The  indomitable  courage  that  was  required  and  shown  by 
the  missionaries,'  says  one,  '  in  getting  a  footing  on  the 
great  and  densely-populated  continent,  is  deserving  of  all 
praise,  and  the  benefits  to  the  natives  that  have  already 
arisen  from  contact  with  them  during  the  short  space  of 
some  seven  or  eight  years  are  immense ;  intertribal  fights, 
formerly  so  common,  being  entirely  at  an  end,  and  trading 
and  communication,  one  tribe  with  another,  now  being 
carried  on  without  fear.'''=  That  statement  is  at  variance 
with  the  fact  that,  however  cruel  may  have  been  the  inter- 
tribal wars  before  the  English  visitors  arrived,  they  were 
afterwards  so  much  more  violent,  the  Christian  converts 
being  special  objects  of  attack,  and  some  of  the  missionaries 
themselves  being  massacred,  that  the  scenes  of  operation 
had  more  than  once  to  be  shifted. 

Traders,  as  well  as  missionaries,  especially  prospectors 
for  gold,  frequently  visited  the  south-eastern  coast  and  the 
adjoining  interior  between  1873  and  1881,  and  so  many  of 
them  were  killed,  that  in  the  latter  year  and  afterwards  it 
was  thought  proper  to  send  two  or  three  men-of-war  to 
wreak  vengeance  on  the  natives  by  firing  upon  any  who 
came  within  range  of  the  guna.  In  1883,  a  schooner  having 
been  wrecked  near  the  mouth  of  the  Fly  Eivor,  in  Torres 
Strait,  and  it  being  suspected  that  the  crew  had  been  killed 
by  the  natives,  several  villages  were  burnt  and  all  the  canoes 
that  could  be  found  were  destroyed  by  a  retributive  expe- 
dition. In  such  ways,  following  the  example  of  earlier 
promoters  of  civihzation  by  gunpowder,  preparation  was 
made  for  bolder  enterprises. 

As  early  as  1874  the  annexation  of  New  Guinea  was  proposed 

♦  '  Tho  Australian  Handbook  for  18SG,'  p.  697. 


H 


li  ! 


i         I 


i 


366 


F///  AND  NEW  GUINEA. 


u 


l!i' 


:>» 

'5!   f 


■  i  ■ 


by  the  New  South  Wales  Government ;  but  it  was  not  sanc- 
tioned by  Lord  Carnarvon,  then  Secretary  of  State  for  the 
Colonies.  In  April,  1883,  the  Queensland  Government,  acting 
on  its  own  responsibility,  sent  a  magistrate  to  the  coast  witli 
orders  to  take  nominal  possession  of  the  whole  eastern  half 
of  the  island  in  the  Queen's  name,  pending  the  settlement 
of  the  old  claim  of  Holland  to  its  western  half,  and  permis- 
sion was  asked  from  the  Crown  for  its  more  real  seizure 
under  orders  from  Brisbane.  These  proceedings  were  objected 
to,  however,  by  the  English  Government,  which,  in  1884,  not 
only  recognised  the  claim  of  Holland  to  the  eastern  half, 
but  also  acknowledged  the  right  of  Germany  to  occupy,  if  it 
chose,  the  northern  half  of  the  remainder.  Thus  British 
New  Guinea  was  limited  to  about  a  fourth  of  the  is!  ncl, 
comprising  an  area  of  88,457  square  miles.  The  control  of 
this  territory,  moreover,  was  assigned,  not  to  the  Queens- 
land authorities,  but  to  a  Special  Commissioner  selected  by 
the  Crown. 

The  Special  Commissioner  first  appointed  was  Sir  Peter 
Scratchley,  who  proceeded  to  Australia  early  in  1885,  and 
visited  New  Guinea  in  the  autumn,  but  whodiedin  December, 
before  he  had  been  able  to  do  more  than  enter  on  the  pre- 
liminaries of  his  work.  His  successor,  the  Hon.  John 
Douglas,  was  prudently  instructed  to  prevent  any  impetuous 
attempts  at  colonization  which  might  bring  disaster  on  those 
embarking  in  it,  and  lead  to  discreditable  and  dangerous 
complications  with  the  natives.  Since  then  little  has  been 
done  beyond  occasional  explorations  and  cautious  visits  with 
a  view  to  the  opening  up  of  trade. 

New  Guinea  may  hereafter  grow  into  a  prosperous 
colony,  but  for  some  time  to  come  there  seems  to  be  suffi- 
cient occupation  in  better  known  and  safer  parts  of  Australia 
and  its  dependencies  for  all  the  honest  energy  and  ambition 
of  Enghsh  adventurers  or  settlers  in  the  New  World  of  the 
Pacific. 


''•  \ 


i  not  sane- 
ito  for  the 
icnt,  acting 
coast  with 
istern  half 
settlement 
nd  pennis- 
eal  seizure 
jre  objected 
n  1884,  not 
Lstern  half, 
iccupy,  if  it 
lus  British 
the  is!  ,nd, 
e  control  of 
he  Queens- 
selected  by 

3  Sir  Peter 
I  1885, and 

Decembei', 
)n  the  pre- 
Bon.   John 

impetuous 

er  on  those 
dangerous 

3  has  been 
visits  with 

prosperous 
o  be  suffi- 
f  Austraha 
d  ambition 
Drld  of  the 


CHAPTER  XXXIII. 

ENGLISH     AUSTRALASIA. 

THB  RBLATIVE  ADVANATOKS  OK  OUK  AUSTRALASIAN   COLONIEa— THEIR 
PROGRESS   AND  THEIR   PROSPECTS. 

HARDLY  more  than  a  century  has  passed  since,  in 
May,  1787,  the  first  cargo  of  convicts,  with  their 
keepers  and  attendants,  was  sent  out  from 
England  to  begin  the  colonization  of  New  South 
Wales.  The  only  object  of  that  enterprise,  highly 
applauded  by  a  few  philanthropists  and  other  enthusiasts, 
but  ridiculed  and  blamed  by  nearly  everybody  else,  was  to 
get  rid  of  some  obnoxious  members  of  society,  and  to  see 
whether  they  could  be  made  better  use  of  in  the  far-off  wastes 
of  the  antipodes  than  in  crowded  and  pestilential  prisons  at 
home.  Yet  out  of  it  has  grown  an  empire  five-and-twenty 
times  as  large  as  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  and  wh'.oh, 
though  still  in  the  first  stage  of  its  growth — the  whole  vast 
area  having  a  smaller  population  than  London — already  has 
a  commercial  value  to  the  mother-country  hardly  less  than 
that  of  India,  and  almost  as  great  as  i^hat  of  all  the  other 
English  dependencies  put  together.  When  the  difficulties  in 
the  way  of  the  first  attempts  at  orderly  settlement  are  con- 
sidered— and  in  the  presence  of  its  convict  population  those 
difficulties  were  great  indeed — its  present  prosperity  is  truly 
marvellous.     What  prosperity  may  be  attained  hereafter 


1 1 


I  , 


!'! 


il 


1'^ 


'     'lii, 


«pp^ 


368 


ENGLISH  A  USTRALASIA. 


1 

• 

1 

-  \  ' 
( 

perhaps  it  is  hardly  possible  for  the  most  san^'uinc  onlooker 
to  anticipate. 

In  only  one  of  the  five  colonies  already  formed  in  the  groat 
island  itself,  and  tliat  one  the  nearest  to  England  in  actual 
distance,  though  the  most  remote  from  it  in  general  ciiarac- 
toristics,  is  the  prospect  uninviting.     The  innnoiise  territory 
of  Western  Australia  has  few  attractions  for  J^ritish  enter- 
prise.     Least  favoured  by  nature,  its  comparatively  scanty 
resources  have  never  been  duly  made  use  of  by  the  arts  ot 
man.     The  scene,  at  starting,  of  grievous  blunders  in  colo- 
nization, it  profited  little  by  the  subsequent  efforts  to  improve 
it  through  help  of  convict-labour  ;  and  it  can  scarcely  be  ex- 
pected to  attain  much  importance  till  the  v.hole  Australian 
continent  has  become  so  well  peopled,  and  is  so  well  pro- 
vided with  means  of  transit  and  inter-communication,  that 
it'j  deficiencies  can  easily  bo  supplied  from  richer  districts, 
and  the  wealth  of  those  districts  can  give  a  new  value  to  its 
more  barren  regions.     Its   northern   provinces    and   coast 
districts,  however,  deserve  more  attention  than  they  have 
yet  received  ;  and  perhaps  the  day  is  not  far  distant  when 
they  will  be  parted  off  from  it  and  associated  in  a  new  and 
flourishing  colony   with  the  contiguous  districts,  now  ap- 
pended to  South  Australia,  to  which  the  independent  name 
of  North  Australia  has  already  been  given.     The  harbours 
on  this  northern  coast  offer  special  facilities  for  trade  witli 
the  neighbouring  Indian  Archipelago,  and  the  rich  pasture- 
ia,nds  in  the  interior  wait  only  to  be  turned  to  profit  by 
prudent  adventurers.     When  the  resources  of  North  Aus- 
tralia have  been  utilised,  it  may  be  easier  than  it  now  is  to 
wisely  extend  English  influence  01:  the  opposite  coast  of  New 
Guinea. 

Thriving  Australia,  however,  still  means  little  more  than 
the  southern  and  eastern  coast-line  of  the  island,  and  much 
of  this  has  as  yet  been  but  sUghtly  used.  We  have  only 
begun  to  discover  the  value  of  Queensland  as  a  great  field 
for  cotton  and  sugar  cultivation,  whence  even  greater  profit 
may  be  derived  than  from  the  inland  pasture-grounds  which 


ITS  VAST  h'ESOU/^CES. 


3^J9 


are  already  vying  with  the  iiighlands  of  New  South  Wales 
and  Victoria  in  production  of  wool,  the  other  great  staple 
material  for  clothing.  To  supply  the  requirements  of  this 
younger  trade,  new  ports  are  growing  up  along  the  nortli- 
eastern  shore,  and  the  enterprise  developed  in  them  will 
become  the  parent  of  fresii  energy  in  the  almost  boundless 
plantation  grounds  and  squatters'  runs  that  adjoin  them. 

If  cotton  and  sugar  are  to  rival  v/ool  as  sources  of  wealth 
to  Queensland,  coal  is  already  beginning  to  rival  wool  in 
making  the  fortune  of  New  South  Wales.  Gold  for  some 
time  usurped  too  much  of  the  energy  that  can  find  suitable 
employment  in  producing  wool  in  Victoria;  but  here  the 
gold  trade  has  helped  the  wool  trade,  and  both  must  contri- 
bute mightily  to  further  growth  of  the  southern  colony, 
which  has  already  grown  with  a  rapidity  and  vigour  unsur- 
passed in  the  history  of  the  world.  Copper  is  joined  with 
wool  in  promoting  the  prosperity  of  South  Australia,  which 
also  has  another  great  source  of  profit  in  its  luxuriant  farm- 
lands, making  it  the  principal  granary  of  the  whole  Austra- 
lian island.  Thus,  if  wool  is  a  connaon  source  of  wealth  to 
all  the  Australian  colonies,  each  has  a  second  staple  of  its 
own,  enabling  it  to  assert  its  independence  in  the  race  of 
advancement  in  which  all  are  alike  engaged.  All,  too,  are 
well  adapted  for  the  production  of  grain,  fruit,  vegetables, 
and  other  commodities,  and  for  the  supply  of  timber  of 
various  sorts,  with  which  the  wants  of  their  own  inhabitants, 
however  numerous,  can  be  met,  leaving  vast  stores  to  be  sent 
to  other  parts. 

The  early  Australasian  voyagers  were  not  far  wrong  in 
supposing  that  Van  Diemen's  Land  was  a  part  of  Australia. 
The  narrow  channel  known  as  Bass's  Strait  separates  islands 
almost  identical  in  character,  or  differing  from  one  another 
only  so  far  as  an  outlying  peninsula  must  necessarily  differ 
from  the  neighbouring  mainland.  From  tropical  Queens- 
land there  is  an  even  gradation  of  climate  down  to  temperate 
Tasmania ;  and  here,  as  in  the  northern  districts,  wool  is 
the  main  source  of  wealth.     If  the  southern  colony  has 

24 


I  ! 


1 


370 


ENGLISH  AVSTKAr.ASIA. 


!f! 


M 


W 


i 


I 


I 


11 
El 


made  less  progress  tlian  the  other  olTslioots  of  New  South 
Wales,  it  is  flue  alone  to  the  excess  of  tlio  convict  element 
in  its  social  constitution — a  source  of  weakness  that  tiino 
au'l  the  in-coniing  of  fresh  colonists  wiU  speedily  remove. 

IVoni  the  other  portions  of  Australasia  New  Zealand  and 
Fiji  stand  quite  apart.  The  Fijian  group,  small  and  remote, 
can  never  be  of  much  importance,  but  New  Zealand, 
though  also  .relatively  small,  has  great  possibihties,  of  which 
hitherto  there  has  been  only  too  much  haste  to  make  use. 
In  its  iron,  its  coal,  and  its  agricultural  capacities,  it  has 
gieater,  thougii  less  showy,  sources  of  wealth  tha)i  its  gold; 
but  the  gold  has  done  good  service  by  bringing  into  tiio 
islands  settlers  ready  to  develop  its  other  opportunities. 
'  The  Britain  of  the  South  '  must  justify  its  right  to  the 
title  by  manufacturing  industry  of  the  sort  that  has  niado 
England  great. 

During  the  first  century  of  its  history  as  an  English 
]>ossession,  Australia  has  acquired  a  population  of  more 
than  two  and  a  half  millions,  spread  over  portions  of  the 
five  great  colonies  into  which  the  island  has  already  been 
divided,  and  there  are  nearly  three-quarters  of  a  million 
more  of  English  origin  iu  the  adjacent  colonies  of  New- 
Zealand  and  Tasmania.  Obstacles  have  thus  far  been 
offered  to  proposals  for  uniting  all  these  colonies,  with  the 
exception,  perhaps,  of  New  Zealand,  which  has  most 
separate  vitality  of  its  own,  in  a  grand  Australian  federa- 
tion, more  or  less  on  the  model  of  the  Dominion  of  Canada. 
Fiscal  and  other  differences  and  jealousies  have  stood  iu  the 
way  of  union ;  but  these  will  probably  be  before  long 
removed  or  adjusted,  and  there  can  bo  no  doubt  that  the 
welfare  of  the  whole  group,  and  of  its  several  parts,  would  he 
promoted  by  their  subordination  to  one  central  Governmeut, 
under  th«  nominal  rule  of  the  British  Crown,  but  in  an 
essentials  completely  independent.  When  that  change 
conies,  there  may  be  further  advantage  iu  substituting  for 
the  present  divisions,  which  were  eliocted  piecemeal  aud 
somewhat  arbitrarily  with  a  view  to  temporary  couvenieuce 


/TS  PROGRESS  AND  PROSPECTS. 


371 


Jew  South 
•.t  c'leinent 

that  time 
rcmovu. 
oaliuid  and 
lid  remote, 
/  Zealand, 
;s,  of  which 

make  use. 
ties,  it  has 
ai  I  its  i^old ; 
ig  into  the 
)portunities.  | 
•if^ht  to  the  I 
,t  has  niadi;    I 

an   Enghsli    | 
ion  of   nioro 
L-tions  of  the 
already  heeu 
of  a  miUion 
.lies  of  Kew 
us   far  been 
ies,  with  the 
has    most 
ilian  federa- 
of  Canada, 
stood  in  the 
before  long 
ubt  tliat  the 
rts,  would  be 
overumeut, 
but  in  an 
liat    change 
stituting  for 
iccmeal  and 
conveuieuce 


n 


or  necessity,  a  new  arrangement  of  provinces,  nioro  numerous 
and  smaller  in  area,  but  more  liomogeneous  than  tlie  ncnv 
established  colonies.  Australasia,  with  its  three  million 
square  miles  of  territory,  embracing  wide  variations  of  climato 
and  other  physieal  conditions,  affords  room,  and  is  well 
adapted,  not  for  six  or  seven,  but  for  twice  or  thrice  as  many 
distinct  units  of  local  self-government,  bound  together  by 
common  interests,  and  associated  for  general  advancement 
ill  a  single  scheme  of  supreme  administration. 

Already  this  aggregate  of  later  offshoots  from  the  mother 
country  has  surpassed  the  earlier  colonial  acquisitions  of 
Ihigland  in  British  North  America  in  industrial  progress, 
though  not  in  growth  of  population,  and  is  surpassed  in  the 
history  of  modern  nation-making  by  the  United  States 
alone,  the  outcome  of  the  yet  earlier  colonizing  enterprise 
of  Englishmen.  Its  record,  too,  in  spite  of  blunders  and 
crimes  in  the  treatment  of  native  races,  has  been  marred 
by  fewer  offences  and  errors,  wars  of  extermination  or  of 
rivalry,  than  appear  in  the  chronicles  of  colonial  progress 
iu  the  great  American  continent,  and  yet  more  in  South 
Africa.  There  is  truth  as  well  as  grace  in  the  jubilant 
verse  of  one  of  its  poets,  Mrs.  Aheane,  better  known  as 
Agnes  Neale : 

'  Every  great  majestic  river,  flowing  on  to  meet  the  sea, 
\  Bearing  on  its  stately  bosom  many  a  gallant  argosy, 

Owes  its  proud,  resistless  volume  to  ten  tliouund  tiny  rilla, 
Takes  its  rise  in  some  low  wood-spring  hidden  in  the  <iuiet  hills  : 
So  through  dimness  and  through  darkness  ro^e  our  infant  colony 
On  a  continent  of  beauty,  sleeping  on  a  southern  sea, 
Lying  all  at  rest  and  silent,  never  dreaming  what  should  be — 
Never  looking  through  the  future  to  the  wonders  that  v/e  see. 
Many  a  battle  has  been  fought,  and  many  a  victory  has  been  won, 
Since  first  the  sable  warrior  drew  the  blood  of  England's  gallant  son  ; 
Many  a  deed  of  blood  has  reddened,  many  a  cry  gone  up  to  (Jod, 
Since  first  this  southern  land  of  light  was  by  the  foot  of  white  man 

trod  ; 
Still  through  all,  through  fights  and  bloodshed,  inward  strife  and 

inward  fear, 
Through  the  wearying  disappointments  always  coming  year  by  year. 
Through  it  all,  with  dauntless  courage,  inborn  powe;  and  iiibori  might. 
Like  the  grass  in  spring-time  pushing  through  the  earth's  crust  into 

light, 

24—2 


U.I  I 


ll' 


I 


I 


372 


ENGLISH  A  US  TRA  LAS  I  A 


'A 


Through  intri^ies  of  le^'irtliitorfl,  fiiction  fi^ht  iin«l  party  Htriff, 
liravi'Iy  tiid  the  imtioit  Htiiiggk',  ii|iwhi'(I,  onwnni,  into  life, 
Mriivcly  fnu^'ht  iinti  fairly  coiunicrid,  till  to-day  we  set;  Iht  Htand, 
Not  a  tiny,  Huarcivknown  liundfiil,  l)ut  a  rich  uikI  nilL^hty  land  ; 
Strong,',  uith  all  tlit;  utruu^^tlt  that  youth  haH,  TiuD.'H  unending'  war  ti 

wa^o, 
Miyhty  with  tht-  ini^'ht  of  agi's,  htsrn  l>y  rit^ht  of  lifritaj^'c, 
Uich  with  HtorcH  of  niinurul  wealth,  and  MocUh  and  htidH  by  land  and 

Hea, 
L(»  !  her  whitt'win^ceil  nicHHengerH  are  HWeejjinjj  over  every  sta, 
Lo  !  a  younj,'  world     lo  !  a  Htrong  world— riwes  in  tluH  distant  cliiiif, 
DeHtined  to  increaKe  and  Htrenj,'then  to  the  very  end  of  time. 
Here,  throu},'h   veinx  with  young  life  HWelling,  rollH  the  bluud  that 

rules  the  world  ; 
Here  an  hers,  and  dear  as  honour,  Kngland'H  banner  HoatH  unfurKd. 
()  Australia  !  fair  and  lov«'ly,  empress  of  the  southern  sia, 
Wliat  a  gloriouH  fame  awaits  the*-  in  the  futurt;'s  history  ! 
Land  uf  wealth  and  land  of  beauty,  tro])ic  suns  and  arctic  snowH, 
Where  the  splendid  noontide  bla/.es,    where  the  raging  storui-wimi 

blowB, 
1'e  tliou  proud  and  bo  thou  daring,  ever  true  to  (!od  and  man  ; 
In  all  evil  be  to  rearward,  in  all  good  take  thou  the  van  ; 
Only  let  thy  hands  be  stainless,  let  thy  life  be  pure  and  true, 
And  a  destiny  awaits  thee  such  as  natitms  never  knew.'-^' 


\ 


•Australian  liallads  and  Khymes,'  p.  IfiO. 


I 


CHAPTER  XXXIV. 
Tin:  i:nd  of  tiik  ktoky. 

rilR  VAM'K  OV  OUR  OnLONIKS— THK  t'OMTIf'AI.  ANIi  COMMKIUIAti  AIiVANTAfiKS 
UKUIVKM  AND  DKKIVAULK  KKOM  TIIKM— TIIKIIl  I.MI'OUTANCK  AH  KIKLDS 
Oh'    K.MIUKATION. 

N  effect  of  peace  in  fruitful  kiii^'dotns,  where  tlio 
stock  of  people,  receiving  no  cojisumption  nor 
diminution  by  war,  doth  continually  multiply 
and  increase,  must,  in  the  end,*  wrote  Lord 
Bacon,  in  IGOG,  in  a  document  addressed  to 
James  the  First,  setting  forth  the  advantages  of  English 
emigration  to  Ireland,  '  be  a  surcharge  or  overflow  of  people 
more  than  the  territories  can  well  maintain;  which  many 
times,  insinuating  a  general  necessity  and  want  of  means 
into  all  estates,  doth  turn  external  peace  into  internal 
troubles  and  seditions.  Now,  what  an  excellent  diversion 
of  this  inconvenience  is  ministered  to  your  Majesty  in  this 
plantation  of  Ireland,  wherein  so  many  families  may  receive 
sustentation  and  fortune,  and  the  discharge  of  them  out  of 
England  and  Scotland  may  prevent  many  seeds  jf  future 
perturbation  ;  so  that  it  is  as  if  a  man  were  troubled  for  the 
avoidance  of  water  from  the  places  where  he  hath  built  his 
house,  and  afterwards  should  advise  with  himself  to  cast 
those  floods,  pools,  or  streams,  for  pleasure,  provision,  or 
use.  So  shall  your  Majesty  in  this  work  have  a  double 
commodity,  in  the  avoidance  of  people  here,  and  in  making 
use  of  them  there.' 


if 

4 


w 


374 


T/fF,  END  OF  THE  STORY. 


If 


t! 

i 

i 

1 

1 

Tln-ou^'h  more  tlian  two  conturir^  and  a  lialf  tho  wisdom 
of  tliat  quaintly  expressed  opinion  has  b(>oii  fully  proved,  if 
not  in  the  colonization  of  Ireland,  yet  in  other  work  of  tlio 
sort  recommended  by  Lord  l^acon.  During  that  period,  as 
wo  havo  seen,  Enj^dand  has  gradually  ac(|uired  a  vast 
colonial  empire,  which,  if  capable  of  almost  boundless 
growth  in  the  future,  has  already  proved  of  great  advanta^'o 
to  her,  both  '  in  the  avoidance  of  people  here,  and  in  making 
use  of  them  there.'  The  good  issues  of  tho  '  double  com- 
modity,'indeed,  havo  been  far  more  numerous  and  far  moro 
various  than  Bacon  could  have  conceived.  Our  '  plantations,' 
as  colonies  were  formerly  styled,  have  yielded  and  contiiuie 
to  yield  a  perennial  harvest  of  benefits,  political,  com- 
mercial, and  social,  to  the  mother  country. 

The  political   benefits  were   most   apparent  in  the  fust 
stage  of  our  colonial  history.    The  successive  migrations  by 
which,  during  the  seventeenth  century,  the  United  States  of 
America  and  the  West  Indian  Islands  were  stocked  with 
enterprising  settlers,  though  fortunately  they  did  not  relieve 
E)igland  of   all  her  '  unquiet  spirits,'  did  '  prevent  many 
seeds  of  future  perturbation.'     Swarms  of  violent  Cavaliers, 
as  well  as  of  violent  Roundheads,  crossed  the  Atlantic,  and 
thus,  without  weakening  the  strife  between  the  champions 
and  opponents  of  Stuart  rule  and  misrule,  relieved  it  of 
many  confusing  elements,  and  left  a  freer  battle-ground  for 
the   great   fight   on   behalf  of   constitutional   and  r^'ligicnis 
liberty  which  has  mainly  conduced  to  the  later  greatness  of 
our  country.     Had  all  the  forces  been  retained  witliiu  tlio 
narrow  limits  of  the  kingdom,  the  contest  would  necessarily 
have  been  attended  with  far  more  misery  to  those  who  had 
to  struggle  through  it,  and  the  final  issue  might  have  been 
very  different.     And  her  colonies  have  continued,  though  in 
less  degree,  to  be  of  the  same  use  to  England.     In  each 
generation  wise  or  unwise  enthusiasts,  bold  thinkers  and 
actors  of  all  sorts,  have,  to  use  Bacon's  simile,  been  drained, 
like  baneful  floods,  from  ground  in  which  they  were  or  might 
have  become  only  obnoxious  and  pestilential  elements,  and 


; 


' 


t  ^ 


^ 


THE  rOLlTICAI.  VALUE  OF  OUR  COl.OMES. 


375 


liiivc  hocu  (liroc'tcMl  into  cliaiincls  by  whlcli  barren  wa«;tos 
iinvo  been  tuniod  into  furtilo  •^'ardcnM.  This  lias  been  notably 
the  caso  with  our  Australian  colonics.  Our  somotimo  con- 
vict settlements  received  injury  as  well  as  beneiit  from  their 
extensive  peopling'  witii  troublesome  and  dan^'crous  crimi- 
nals ;  but  many  of  thoso  crimi?ials  were  in  their  new  homes 
converted  into  honest  and  enterprisini,'  men,  who,  in  helping' 
themselves,  famously  helped  on  the  pro;^'ress  of  their  new 
homes  ;  and  the  conversion  would  have  been  much  moro 
thorough  and  universal  had  it  been  moro  wisely  conducted. 
This  is  a  themo  of  encouraging  reflection  to  philanthropists  ; 
and,  in  these  days  in  which  it  is  rightly  considered  better  to 
prevent  people  from  becoming  criminals  than  to  allow  them 
to  fall  into  vice  anc'  then  to  punish  them  for  being  vicious,  it 
should  suggest  a  far  wider  Qeld  for  reformatory  enterprise 
than  now  generally  finds  favour. 

Another,  and  perhaps  a  yet  more  evident,  political  benefit 
derived  and  still  more  dei'ivahle  from  our  colonies  is  in  their 
value  as  vast  military  and  naval  schools.  War  is  altogether 
hateful ;  but  until  all  the  world  consents  to  turn  swords  into 
ploughshares,  and  spears  into  pruning-hooks,  wc  must  bo 
prepared  to  fight  in  case  of  need,  and  our  colonics  have 
always  furnished  the  best  of  all  training-f^rounds  for  warfare. 
Happily  they  can  be  made  full  use  of  witliout  actual  fight- 
ing. In  India,  in  Canada,  in  the  Cape,  and  in  Australia,  as 
well  as  in  the  two  small  colonies  of  Malta  and  Gibraltar, 
which  are  almost  exclusively  military  settlements,  capacity 
for  enduring  hardship,  variety  of  resource,  and  fitness  for 
all  tlio  stern  necessities  of  war,  are  excellently  learnt  by 
soldiers  whose  present  use  is  important  enough  as  guardians 
of  the  strongholds  of  English  power  and  infiuence.  In  this 
much  has  been  done  ;  yet  moro  remains.  "We  have  as  yet 
but  feebly  copied  the  machinery  by  which  ancient  Rome  so 
long  gave  strength  to  her  vast  possessions.  W^e  have  taken 
good  soldiers  from  some  of  our  subject  races ;  but  we  have 
only  hero  and  there,  as  in  the  employment  of  Indian  troops 
in  Abyssinia  and  the  Soudan,  shifted  them  from  their  own 


■il 


f 


3-!(^ 


THE  EM)  OF  THE  STORY. 


!   I 


\ 
\ 


noii;hl)oiirlioc(la  to  otliors  in  wliicli  they  can  do  special  work. 
Sikhs  in  Ciiina,  Kafllrs  in  tlio  West  Inilics,  perliaps  even 
Maoris  in  (.-anada,  would  materially  conduce  to  the  defence 
of  our  various  possessions,  and  the  bindinj^  of  them  all  into 
one  preat  British  dominion. 

Our  colonies,  however,  and  the  trades  becjottcn  by  thcni, 
are  yet  more  valuable  as  nurseries  for  seamen  than  as 
schools  fo»*  soldieis.  In  this  respect  the  advantages  are  too 
transparent  to  need  any  arguments.  The  hundreds  of 
thousands  of  hardy  mariners  who  man  our  trading  ships 
form  a  race  from  which  our  vessels  of  war  can  bo  supplied, 
in  time  of  need,  with  ready-made  crews. 

'  Whatever  gives  colonies  to  France,'  said  Talleyrand,  and 
that  wliich  he  wished  for  Franco  has  been  attained  by  Great 
]5ritaip,  *  su})plies  her  with  ships  and  sailors,  manufacturers 
and  husbandmen.  Victories  by  land  can  only  give  her 
nuitinous  subjects,  who,  instead  of  augmenting  the  national 
force  by  their  riches  or  numbers,  contribute  only  to  disperse 
and  enfeel'io  that  force  ;  but  the  growth  of  colonies  supplies 
her  witii  zealous  citizens,  and  the  increase  of  real  wealth 
and  effective  numbers  is  the  certain  consequence.' 

And  that  value  is  far  greater  from  a  commercial  than 
from  a  political  point  of  view.  It  is  impossible  to  over- 
estimate the  benefits  which,  in  this  way,  England  has 
received  from  her  colonies.  English  commerce  was  great 
before  English  colonization  began.  Famous  merchants, 
like  Sir  Thomas  Greshani  a^d  others,  before  and  after  his 
day,  sent  their  ships  and  went  themselves  to  every  port 
and  mart  of  size  in  Europe,  and  there  made  interchange  of 
commodities,  whereby  both  they  and  their  country  were 
enriched.  Of  the  wealth  of  the  world  a  large  portion  flowed 
into  and  through  that  country  in  the  sixteenth  century,  as 
it  does  in  the  nineteenth  ;  '  but,'  as  a  shrewd  merchant 
quaintly  said  in  1638,  '  England  being  naturally  seated  in  a 
northern  corner  of  the  world,  and  herein  bending  under  the 
weight  of  too  ponderous  a  burthen,  cannot  possibly  and  for 
ever  find  a  vent  for  all  those  commodities  that  are  to  be 


€i 


THE  COMMERCIAL  VALUE  OE  OUR  COLONIES.     377 

soon  daily  oxportod  and  brouf^'ht  witliin  the  compass  of  so 
narrow  a  circuit,  unloss  tlioro  can  ho,  hy  tlu;  policy  and 
government  of  the  State,  a  mean  found  to  malve  tliis  island 
the  common  emporium  and  stajjlo  of  all  Europe.'*  The 
emporium  of  a  good  deal  more  than  all  l-^uropo  tin's  islnd 
has  become  through  our  colonics  and  the  enterprise  which 
has  led  to  their  formation,  but  which,  without  them,  would 
have  been  sorely  cripjjled.  New  commodities  of  every  sort, 
from  tobacco  to  cotton,  have  been  brought  into  use ;  old 
commodities  as  various,  from  sugar  to  wool,  hnve  been 
vastly  increased  in  quantity  through  the  energy  of  English- 
men in  our  colonial  plantations,  and  thereby  those  who 
have  remained  at  homo  have  been  enriched  no  less  than 
those  who  havo  gono  abroad.  Our  little  Idngdom,  which, 
four  centuries  ago,  was  scarcely  more  than  a  collection  of 
farms,  growing  food  enough  to  nourish  its  two  or  three 
millions  of  inhabitants,  and  not  always  able  to  do  that 
without  great  privation  to  many,  and  with  only  a  sullicicnt 
number  of  small  and  clumsy  factories  to  supply  those  in- 
habitants with  coarse  clothing,  and  the  bare  necessaries  of 
life,  has  now  become  the  great  workshop  and  market  of 
the  world,  bringing  a  thousand  precious  w^ares  from  its 
colonial  possessions,  rendering  them  far  more  precious  by 
its  manufacturing  art,  exchanging  a  portion  of  them  for  the 
valuable  produce  of  other  nations,  and  distributing  the  rest 
among  its  own  inhabitants  and  the  people  of  its  colonies ; 
and,  with  the  profits  of  its  merchandise,  able  to  buy  food 
enough  to  supplement  its  own  agricultural  resources  in 
nourishing  a  population  of  nearly  forty  millions. 

A  wonderful  growth  in  British  commerce  has  arisen 
through  the  growth  of  British  colonization.  Three  hundred 
years  ago  England  was  rising  out  of  the  insignificance  which 
seemed  reasonably  to  belong  to  it  by  reason  of  its  small 
territorial  extent,  and  beginning  to  deserve  the  title,  taunt- 
ingly given  to  it,  but  really  high  praise,  of  '  a  nation  of 
shopkeepers.'  Two  hundred  years  ago  it  was  receiving  the 
*  Lewis  Roberts,  'The  Merchants'  Map  of  Commerce.' 


A\ 


Ji'l 


t       ': 


!! 


I! 


378 


THE  END  OF  THE  STOR  Y. 


Il  I 

I 


i 
I 


first-fruits  of  its  colonial  enterprise  in  America  and  tlio  West 
Indies,  and  of  trade  which  was  nearly  akin  to  colonial 
enterprise  in  India.  One  hundred  years  a^^o  those  sources 
of  profit,  though  yet  far  from  maturity,  had  attained  gif,'antic 
proportions,  and  the  advantages  derived  from  them  were  of 
correspojidiiig  magnitude.  The  progress  since  made  has 
eclipsed  in  grandeur  all  that  preceded  it.  In  17G1  the 
entire  exports  from  Great  Britain  to  all  parts  of  the  world 
amounted  to  £10,038,913  ;  the  corresponding  imports  to 
.€10,292,541.  The  value  of  exports  to  North  America  and 
tlic  West  Indies  was  .€3,330,371,  or  more  than  a  fifth  of 
the  whole ;  the  value  of  the  imports  thence  was  £3,720,261, 
or  more  than  a  third  of  the  whole.  The  exports  to  the  East 
Indies  were  worth  £845,797;  the  imports  thence  were  worth 
£840,987  ;  the  former  being  about  a  twentieth,  the  latter 
about  a  twelfth.  In  1885  the  total  exports  amounted  to 
£271,403,094;  the  total  imports  to  £370,907,955.  Tlic 
United  States  of  America,  no  longer  British  colonics,  but 
none  the  less  direct  outcomes  of  British  colonization,  re- 
ceived from  us  goods  worth  £31,094,589,  and  sent  us  goods 
worth  £80,478,813.  The  exports  to  the  colonies  still  owned 
by  us  were  valued  at  £85,424,218,  including  £30,878,065 
to  India,  £20,104,258  to  Austraha,  £8,374,032  to  British 
North  America,  and  £4,182,196  to  the  Cape  colonies ;  the 
imports  were  valued  at  £84,401,733,  including  £31,882,665 
from  India,.  £23,325,287  from  Australia,  £10,347,290  fioni 
British  North  America,  and  £4,450,450  from  the  Cape 
coloLi'es.  Our  export  trade  with  our  colonies  and  with  the 
United  States  had  increased  nearly  tenfold,  our  import 
trade  nearly  seventeen- ioid,  in  the  course  of  a  century  and 
a  quarter. 

But  even  those  figures  do  not  fairly  indicate  the  com- 
mercial value  of  our  colonies.  From  them,  still  reckoning 
the  United  States  as  the  foremost  of  England's  offspring,  we 
receive  large  supplies  of  fiour,  the  main  necessary  of  life, 
and  nearly  all  our  stores  of  sugar,  coffee,  and  other  articles, 
which,  by  reason  of  their  abundant  supply,  have  ceased  to 


OUR  EMIGRATION  FIELDS. 


2,79 


110  West 
colonial 
sources 
gigantic 
were  of 
aclc  lias 
7G1  the 
Lie  world 
ports  to 
irica  and 
L  liftli  of 
,72G,261, 
the  East 
jre  worth 
;hc  latter 
)untcd  to 
)5.      The 
Dnics,  but 
fition,  re- 
us goods 
ill  owned 
0,878,605 
British 
nies ;  the 
1,882.605 
290  from 
lie   Cape 
with  the 
hnport 
itury  and 

Ithe  com- 
:eckoning 
kpring,  we 
|-y  of  life, 
articles, 
I  ceased  to 


be  luxuries.  Fi'Oiii  thoni,  too,  wo  receive  nearly  all  the 
cotton  and  wool  whicli  are  the  mainstays  of  our  manu- 
facturing energy,  without  which  our  coal  and  iron  would  bo 
comparatively  useless,  and  England  would  fall  back  into  the 
insignilicance  that  it  emerged  from  when  our  colonics  began 
to  be  formed. 

And  yet  those  colonics  seem  only  to  be  in  the  first  stages 
of  their  development.     In  nearly  all  of  them  vast  tracts  of 
land  arc  still  unused,  or  to  a  great  extent  neglected,  and  in 
most  of  their  busiest  portions  there  is  room  for  much  fresh 
enterprise.     They  have  an  aggregate  area  of  little  less  than 
9,000,000  square  miles,  being  more  than  seventy  times  as 
large  as  Great  Britain  and  Ireland ;  but  their  entire  popula- 
tion amounted  in  1881  to  only  about  300,000,000,  less  than 
nine  times  that  of  the  United  Kingdom  ;  and  of  this  popu- 
lation about  seven-eighths,  or  203,000,000  persons,  were  in 
India,  wliose  1,500,000  or  so  fiuarc  miles  constitute  but  a 
sixth  of    the  whole  area.     India,   having  a  lumdred   and 
seventy  persons  to  the  square  mile,  is  about  half  as  crowded 
as  Great  Britain  ;  and  a  few  smaller  dependencies,  especially 
Ceylon  and  Barbados,  in  each  of  whicli  there  are  a  thousand 
to  the  square  mile,  are  more  crowded— the  crowding  being  by 
inhabitants  who  are  not  Englishmen.     But  all  those  colonies 
in  whicli  subject  races  are  few  or  altogether  wanting  are 
peopled  ver}  sparsely  indeed.     Even  the  West  Indies,  with 
their  negro  population,  excluding  British  Guiana,  have,  in 
the  aggregate,  but  eighty  to  the  square  mile,  and  British 
Guiana  has  hardly  nioi'o  than  two.     In  the  Canadian  Do- 
minion, excluding  the  almost  uninhabited  North- West  Terri- 
tory, there  are  less  than  tliree  to  the  square  mile  ;  and  to 
each  square  mile  there  are  in  South  Africa  about  ten  persons 
— these  being  chiefly  Kaffirs;  in  Victoria  there  are  oidy 
eleven ;  in  New  Zealand  less  than  six  ;  in  Tasmania  only 
five  ;  and  in  New  South  W  ..des  less  than  three ;  w!\ile  in 
Queensland  there  arc  two  square  miles,  in  South  Australia 
tliiee,  and  in  Western  Australia  thirty,  for  each  person.     In 
all  our  colonies  there  are  not  more  than  ten  million  Eii'^lish 


! 
ij 


3^o 


THE  END  OF  THE  STORY. 


W^ 


1 


'A 

} 

.1) 


i 


1 

|K 

s 

1       r 

\ 

residents.  It  has  been  estimated  that  they  could  easily 
maintain  a  hundred  million,  when  they  would  still  be  much 
less  populous  than  Groat  Britain  now  is. 

Any  other  than  a  very  gradual  approximation  to  that  vast 
increase  of  population,  of  course,  were  it  at  all  possible,  would 
be  altogether  inexpedient.  Waste  lands  cannot  be  at  once 
rendered  fit  for  use  by  any  but  a  very  scanty  population. 
They  have  to  be  cultivated  and  improved  step  by  step. 
Western  Australia  does  not  furnish  the  only  painful  illustra- 
tion on  record  of  the  ill  effects  of  too  hasty  effort  in  the  way 
of  colonization  ;  but  in  nearly  all  our  colonies  there  is  ample 
room,  if  not  pressing  need,  for  a  far  greater  number  of 
settlers  than  they  have  ;  and  this  being  so,  it  is  surely 
strange  tnat  there  should  not  be  a  far  larger  migration  to 
them  than  now  occurs  from  the  overcrowded  population  of 
the  mother  country.  Nearly  every  calling  in  Great  Britain, 
from  the  lowest  to  the  highest,  is  overmanned.  About 
£9,000,000  are  annually  spent  by  the  nation,  besides  all  the 
outlay  of  private  charity,  in  the  relief  of  a  million  or  more 
poor  persons  who,  unable  to  maintain  themselves,  or  hin- 
dered from  doing  so  by  their  own  misdeeds,  are  thus  a  heavy 
burthen  on  the  other  millions,  who,  for  che  most  part,  find 
it  very  difficult  to  provide  themselves  with  the  necessaries 
of  life ;  and  the  rapid  growth  of  population  makes  the 
burthen  and  the  difficulty  greater  every  year.  Philan- 
thropists and  statesmen,  no  less  than  the  sufferers  them- 
selves, are  seriously  at  fault  for  not  duly  considering  the 
value  of  our  colonies  for  what  Lord  Bacon  called  *  the  double 
commodity  in  the  avoidance  of  people  here,  and  the  making 
use  of  them  there.'  If  the  administrators  of  our  poor  laws, 
and  the  dispensers  of  private  charity,  understood  their  duty, 
they  would  do  vastly  more  than  they  have  hitherto  done  in 
lessening  the  load  of  domestic  pauperism  by  encouraging 
emigration  to  colonies  in  which  there  is  room  and  need  for 
millions  of  fresh  settlers. 

Useless  paupers,  however,  would  be  as  useless  in  the 
colonies  as  they  are  at  home.     Men  and  women  who  have 


PROSPECTS  OF  EMIGRANTS, 


3?  I 


:    I 


easily 
much 

at  vast 
would 
t  once 
ilation. 
y  step, 
ilustra- 
he  way 
5  ample 
iber  of 
surely 
,tion  to 
itiou  of 
Britain , 
About 
}  all  the 
Dr  more 
or  hin- 
heavy 
irt,  find 
Bssaries 
ces  the 
hilan- 
them- 
mg  the 
double 
making 
>r  laws, 
ir  duty, 
done  in 
raging 
ed  for 

in  the 
have 


T>\ 


been  rendered  apathetic  and  witless  by  the  degradation  of 
poverty  have  small  prospect  of  advancement  in  regions  where 
everything  depends  upon  capacity  for  hard  work  and  readi- 
ness in  using  that  capacity  in  any  labour  that  circumstances 
require.     And  the  same  remark  applies,  with  equal  force,  to 
those  other  paupers  of  a  higher  social  grade,  who,  by  train- 
ing  or   natural   deficiency,  are   unable   to   mdintain   their 
ground  in  the  struggle  for  independence  that  arises  in  every 
sphere  of  occupation,  from  that  of  the  field-labourer  or  the 
artisan  to  that  of  the  merchant  or  the  candidate  for  pro- 
fessional employment.     In  the  colonies,  even  more  than  at 
home,  none  but  those  who  have  power  and  will  to  work  can 
expect  to  make  progress.     But  as  every  calling  is  over- 
crowded with  such,  it  is  eminently  desirable,  both  in  their 
own  interests  and  in  those  of  the  nation,  that  their  ranks 
should  be  chinned  and  the  colonies  should  be  aided  by  the 
transference  of  some  of  them  to  new  scenes  of  enterprise. 
England  can  spare  a  goodly  number  of  them,  and  is  con- 
stantly breeding  more  than  she  herself  can  give  work  to, 
and  the  colonies  require  all  they  can  receive,  for  generations 
to  come,  of  immigrants  who  will  have  to  toil  as  manfully  as 
at  home,  but  who  may  fairly  expect  far  richer  gains  than 
they  could  expect  from  their  toil  at  home,  and  who  may 
derive  an  additional  satisfaction  in  their  good  fortune  by 
knowing  that  their  gains  involve  no  loss  to  +^heir  neighbours. 
Each  colony  has  its  special  needs  and  its  special  facilities 
for  advancement ;  but  in  nearly  all — in  all  but  the  few  that 
are  already  well  supplied  with  an  enterprising  population — 
there  is  room  fo^"  hard-working  settlers  of  every  grade.     In 
the  great  emigration-fields  of  British  North  America  and 
Australia,   however,  there  is  most,   and  for  the  present 
boundless,  room  for  farm  labourers  and  their  employers,  and 
for  artisans  and  their  directors.     "Where  vast  tracts  of  land 
wait  only  to  be  tilled,  and  to  have  their  useless  vegetation 
replaced  by  wholesome  cultivation,  where  new  roads  and 
canals  have  to  be  constructed,  and  where,  as  the  produce 
is  multipUed,  the  towns  require  fresh  building  of  houses, 


i' 


p 

w 

wmm 


\ 


38: 


THE  END  OF  THE  STORY. 


increased  development  of  manufactories,  and  augmentation 
of  all  the  resources  for  rendering  available  and  transmitting,' 
to  near  and  distant  marts  the  fruit  of  agricultural  and  other 
labours,  it  is  evident  that  all  who  can  supply  these  demands 
will  be  most  welcome,  and  will  profit  most  by  their  enter- 
prise. 

That  enterprise,  if  rightly  directeci,  cannot  fail  of  success. 
It  must  benefit  the  individuals  who  engage  in  it,  and  confer 
equal  benefit  on  the  countries  that  receive  them,  and  the 
country  that  sends  them  fortl. ,  The  noblest  outcome  of 
English  colonization  appears  in  the  vast  empire  of  the 
United  States  of  America.  But  the  foundations  of  other 
empires  as  noble  have  been  laid,  and  whether  they  continue 
to  own  formal  allegiance  to  their  mother  country,  or  in  the 
end  become  independent  nations,  they  cannot  but  be  of 
inestimable  advantage  to  the  lUtle  island  that  gave  them 
birth.  And  no  political  divergence  need  break  the  bonds  of 
friendship,  or  retard  the  progress  of  the  highly-endowed  race 
of  men  which,  emerging  from  its  English  cradle,  promises  to 
spread  the  civilizing  influences  of  its  birth  over  the  fairest 
and  broadesli  portions  of  both  hemispheres,  and,  in  spite  of 
any  turmoils  that  may  be  incident  to  its  development,  to 
continue  its  good  work 

'  Till  the  war-drum  throbs  no  longer,  and  the  battle-flags  are  furl'd 
In  the  rukliament  of  man.  the  Federatitm  of  the  world.' 


tation 
littiivu' 
[  other 
mauds 
enter- 

uccess. 

confer 
lid  the 
ome  of 

of  the 
f  other 
ontinuo 

in  the 
t  be  of 
■e  thein 
)onds  of 
ved  race 
mises  to 
fairest 
spite  of 


hr 


I'd 


INDEX. 


Abercuomby,    Sir   Ralph,  Trinida'l  captured    by,    Gl  ;    Canada  invaded 

by,  92 
Acadie,  or  Now  Franco.     Sec  Canaila  and  Nova  Scotia 
Adttlaido  River,  Ninth  Australia,  -'314 
Adelaide,  South  Australia,  256,  2i)0,  2tjl,  203,  2G7,  308 
Africa,  Colonies  in  Western,  1  .">;'>- lo7 
Albany,  Western  Australia,  302,  30i 
Alberta,  Canadian  Dominion,  130,  142 

Alexander,  Sir  William,  Nova  Scotia  granted  to  (102 1),  87,  9G 
Annapolis,  Nova  Scotia,  85 
Anti>.;iia,  its  colonization  and  history,  Gl,  G2 
Arthur,  Sir  George,  first  governor  of  Tasmania,  235 
Assam,  190 

Asainiboia,  Canadian  Dominion,  130 
Athaba-ca,  Canadian  Dominion,  130 
Auckland,  New  Zealand,  337,  3 17,  351,  356 
Australia,  140,  202-201,  208,  209,  231,  270,  30G-319,  3G7-372.       See  also 

New  South  W;  'i>-j  (Queensland,  Suutli  Australia,  Victoria,aJui  Western 

Australia 
Australia  Felix,  228,  242,  308 
Australia,  South.     See  South  Australia 
Australia,  Western.     See  Western  Australia 

Australian  Aborigines,  203,  200-209,  229,  230,  304,  309-311,  316,  317 
Ayacue,  Sir  George,  his  invasion  and  conquest  of  Barbados  in  1051  and 

1652,  34,  35 

Bacon,  Lord,  on  colonization,  373 

Bahamas,  the,  first  visited  by  Columbus,  28 ;  their  colonization  by  the 
English,  and  present  condition,  60,  61 

Baird,  Sir  David,  in  Cape  Colony,  102 

Ballarat  Gold-Fields,  Victoria,  272,  274,  277-279,  285,  286 

Barbados,  discovered  by  the  Portuguese,  31  ;  robbed  of  its  Indian  inhabi- 
tanta  by  the  Spaniards,  32  ;  visited  by  the  English  in  1005  and  1025, 
32;  colonized  by  Sir  William  Courteen  in  1025,  32  ;  its  early  troubles, 
33  ;  made  a  Royalist  stionghoM  by  Lord  Willoughby  of  I'arham  in 
1650,  33 ;  conquered  for  the  Conimonwealtli  by  Sir  George  Ayscue 


384 


INDEX. 


1 ; 


in  16r)2,  34,  35  ;  furnished  with  white  slaves  from  England  in  ICn? 
and  other  yearH,  30  ;  its  prosperity  in  the  middle  of  the  sevtiiteeiUh 
century,  37  ;  Lord  Willouf,'hby'8  second  j,'overnnient,  37  ;  its  later 
I)ro(,'re8s,  37  ;  its  slave  laws,  :KS  ;  its  present  condition,  05 

Rarktr,  Captain,  the  Australian  explorer,  257 

liarkly,  Sir  Henry,  governor  of  Victoria,  280,  281 

Uass,  the  Australian  discoverer,  215,  232,  210 

Bass's  Straits,  21 G,  240 

Basutoland,  171 

Batliurst,  Australia,  217,  272,  280,  306 

Batman,  John,  his  early  settlement  in  Victoria,  241,  242,  244 

Bay  of  Islands,  the.  New  Zealuud,  321,  332,  337,  350 

Bechuanalaiid,  174,  176 

Benbow,  Admiral,  50 

Bendigo  Gold-Fields,  Victoria,  273,  274,  286 

Berbice,  03 

Bermudas,  the,  their  discovery  and  colonization,  59 ;  their  progress  and 
present  condition,  CO 

Berry,  Sir  John,  in  Newfoundland,  73 

Bla.xland,  the  Australian  explorer,  1.17,  306 

Bligh,  Captain,  governor  of  New  South  Wales,  214 

liloemfontein,  South  Africa,  173,  174 

Blue  Mountains,  the,  New  South  Wales,  217,  219,  228,  306 

Boers,  the,  159-101,  171-174,  181-186 

Borneo,  196-200 

Botany  Bay,  200,  207,  209,  211,  212 

Bourke,  Sir  Richard,  governor  of  New  South  Wales,  220,  227,  215    "MO 
327 

Bombay,  189 

Bowen,  Sir  George,  governor  of  Victoria,  282  ;  of  Queensland,  297,  299 ; 
of  New  Zealand,  351 

Boyd,  massacre  of  the  crew  of  the,  in  New  Zealand,  321-323 

Bradford,  Ontario,  119 

Brady,  the  Tasmanian  bush-ranger,  233,  234 

Brazil,  the  fabled  Island  of,  17,  19 

Brisbane,  Sir  Thomas,  governor  of  New  South  Wales,  220,  226 

Brisbane,  (^leensland,  291,  293,  294,  296,  299 

Bristol,  early  voyages  of  exploration  from,  17-21 

British  Columbia,  its  early  history,   128  ;    its  establishment  as  a  colony, 
(1857),  129,  148  ;  its  gold  and  other  wealth,  129,  148,  151,  152;  its 
union  with  Vancouver  Island,  129;  its  absorption  in  the  Canadian 
Dominion,  130,  133  ;  its  present  condition  and  resources,  142-144 

British  Guinea,  its  history  and  present  condition,  63,  64 

British  Honduras,  65 

British  Kaffraria,  174 

British  North  Borneo,  200 

British  New  Guinea,  366 

Brooke,  Rajah,  in  Borneo,  197-199 

Broome,  Sir  F.  N.,  governor  of  Western  Australia,  305 

Bruce,  George,  the  first  English  resident  in  New  Zealand,  321 

Buccaneers,  the,  of  the  West  Indies,  42-48,  52 

Buckley,  William,  his  adventures  among  the  natives  of  Victoria,  243-245 

Burke,  Robert  O'Hara,  the  Australian  explorer,  315-317 


r 


IX  DEW 


3«5 


\  in  16r.7 

■inteenth 

its  later 


)<rres3  and 


I,  2ir.,  -240, 


297,  2H9 ; 


a  colony, 
I,  152  ;  its 

Canadian 
12-144 


243-245 


Ihirmah,  I'.tO 

I'.urni  IJurra  Copper  Mines,  South  Australia,  261,  2Gr» 

liush-raiigors,  in  Australia,  221,  227  ;  in  Tasmania,  2:33-23;' 

Cahot's  discovery  of  America,  19-21,  71 
Calcutta,  189 

Calvert,  Sir  (Jeorge,  his  cob^nization  of  Newfoundland,  72 
Cain«'ron,  C.-neral,  in  New  Zealand,  347,  348 

Canada,  <liscovered  hy  Jacipies  Cartier  (l.")o4),  S3  ;  colonized  l>y  the 
French  (1608),  84;  Champlain's  government  (lOOS-lti:}.-)),  8.'»-^7  ; 
comiuered  by  Sir  David  Kirke  in  1629,  and  restored  to  France  in 
1633,87  ;  earlyhistory  of,  87-89;  its  condition  in  the  v.ightetnth  century, 
90,  91  ;  wars  with  Ani'  rica  i  nd  England,  91-9')  ;  couipiered  hy  the 
Knjflish  (1759),  93-95,  1  ;  its  early  condition  as  an  English  colony, 
103,  106  ;  its  first  war  with  the  United  States  (1775-1776),  101.  105  ; 
the  relations  of  its  French  and  English  inhabitants,  lOcMlO  ;  pitlitical 
disputes,  110,  111  ;  formation  of  tiie  pntvinces  of  Up])er  and  Lower 
Canada  (1791),  110;  the  'Reign  of  Terror'  (1807-1^11),  111  ;  xU 
second  war  with  the  United  States  (18121814),  112-114;  further 
political  troubles,  114-116  ;  insurrections  in  Upper  Canada  (1837-1838), 
116,  117  ;  the  Earl  of  Durham's  visit  to  the  colony  (1838),  106-109, 
117  ;  Charles  P<mlett  Thomscm's  and  Sir  Charles  Metcalf's  adminis- 
trations, 118  ;  union  of  the  two  provinces  (1839),  118  ;  the  Canadian 
C(mfederation  (1867),  118,121,  138,  139  ;  its  purchase  of  the  Hudson's 
Bay  Territory,  138  ;  development  of  the  principal  towns,  118-120,  147  ; 
its  natural  features  and  resources,  138-142 

Canadian  Dominion,  the,  121,  130,  131-134.  See  aUo  Alberta,  Assiniboia, 
Athabasca,  British  Columbia,  Canada,  Manitoba,  New  Brunswick, 
Nova  Scotia,  Ontario,  Prince  Edward  Island,  Quebec,  and  Sas- 
katchewan 

Canadian  Pacific  Railway,  the,  133,  134 

Canterbury,  New  Zealand,  337,  339,  356 

Cape  Breton,  colonized  by  the  French,  91  ;  captured  by  the  English  in 
1745,  and  restored  to  the  French  in  1748,  91  ;  re-captured  by  the 
English  in  1758,  92,  99  ;  its  later  history,  99  ;  its  present  condition 
and  resources,  135,  136 

Cape  Colony,  its  history  imder  the  Dutch,  158  162  ;  its  annexation  by 
England  (1795-1815),  150,  161,  162  ;  the  first  Kaffir  war  (1811),  163- 
165  ;  the  origin  of  Graham's  Town,  165  ;  the  Dutch  insurrection 
(1815),  167  ;  tho  second  Kaffir  war  (1818),  166,  167  ;  the  third  Kaffir 
war  (1834-1836),  167—169;  the  abolition  of  slavery  (1834),  173; 
migrations  to  Orange  Free  State,  Natal,  and  the  Transvaal,  172,  173. 
181,  182;  the  fourth  Kaffir  war  (1846-1852),  170,  171  ;  the  progress 
of  the  colony,  170,  175  ;  its  condition  and  resources,  174-176 

Cape  Coast  Castle,  156 

CapeTown,  158,  175 

Carey,  General,  in  New  Zealand,  347,  348 

Carlisle,  the  Earls  of,  owners  of  Barbados,  32,  33 

Carpentaria,  the  Gulf  of,  216,  293,  295,  312,  318 

Cartier,  Jactjues,  discovery  of  Canada  by,  in  1534,  83,  84 

Cathay,  the  fabled  riches  of,  17-19,  28 

Cetewayo,  the  Zulu  chief,  183,  184 

Ceylon,  its  ancient  prosperity,  191,  192 ;  its  Portuguese  and  Dutch  occu- 

25 


38'5 


INDEX. 


1 


5 


patinu,  102  ;  its  ciiniiuest  by  the  KngliHh,  192  ;  its  prusent  conditidii 

ami  risoiircL'S,  l'.i2-l'.tl 
Cliaiiii>laiii,  Saiiiml,  his  cnlonizatidH  and  gdvcrmneiit  of  Canada,  84-87 
ChildiTs,  H.  C.  !•:.,  ill  Vic-t'tiia,  281 
ChriHtchurc'h,  Xuw  Ztaland,  '-VMS 
Chiikc,  Dr.,  discovtTV  of  i,'uhl  in  Australia  by,  271 
Cnd-tishirit:s,  Xfwfiumdlaiid,  7--S1 

Collins,  ColontI,  his  attt-'iiiptcd  Hcttlcnu-nt  in  Port  Phillip,  210,  211 
Collins,  Colonel,  in  Cajw  Colony,  1(5-"J 
Colombo,  Ceylon,  1!I2 
Colmnlnis,   his  discovery  of  America,  18,  20,   2S  ;    his  exile  in  Jamaica, 

40,  11 
Convicts  in  New  South  Wales,  210-215,220-223,  221-227;  in  Tasmania, 

2:52  ;  in  Western  Australia,  ;{0;5,  ;J01 
Cook,  Captain,  his  visits  to  New  Zealand  and  Australia,  204-208,  2fl:j 
Cook  Strait,  New  Zenlanrl,  .'}.'}.'] 
Cooper's  Creek,  Australia,  31  "t,  316 
Courteen,  Sir  William,  his  coloniiiation  of  Barbados,  32 
Cuba,  43 

Cunningham,  Allan,  explorations  in  Australia  by,  306 
Cyprus,  153,  154 

Damimku,  William,  as  a  buccaneer,  48,  203  ;  his  visits  to  Australia,  203, 

204 
Daniel,  J,  F.,  on  the  Jubilee  of  Melbourne,  282 
Darlinj,'  Downs,  Australia,  295,  297,  306 
Darling  liiver,  Australia,  228,  242,  307 
Darling,  Sir  Charles,  governor  of  Victoria,  281,  282 
Darling,  Sir  Ralph,  governor  of  New  South  Wales,  226 
Darwin,  Charles,  in  New  Zealand,  329 
Delagoa  Bay,  178,  181 
T)eiuerara,  63 

Denisim,  Sir  W.  T.,  governor  of  Tasmania,  237  ;  of  New  South  Wales,  287 
Derby,  the  Earl  of,  on  New  Zealand  warfare,  342 
Detroit,  112 
Dorado,  El,  63 

D'Oyley,  Colonel,  governor  of  Jamaica,  46,  48 
Drake,  Sir  Francij,  his  piracies  and  public  warfare  against  Spain  in  the 

West  Indies  and  elsewhere,  23,   30,  31,  43  ;  his  visit  to  the  site  of 

British  Columbia,  128 
Du  Cane,  Sir  Charles,  governor  of  Tasmania,  238 
Dundonald,  the  Earl  of,  his  visit  to  Trinidad,  64 
Dunedin,  New  Zealand,  356 
Durban,  Natal,  181 

D'Urban,  Sir  Benjamin,  governor  of  Cape  Colony,  167 
Durham,  the  Earl  of,  in  Canada,  106-109,  114-li7 
Dyaks,  the,  of  Borneo,  197-199 


East  India  Company,  the,  24,  188,  191,  201 

Entry  Island,  New  Zealand,  327 

Erie,  Fort,  112,  113 

I'^ssequibo,  63 

Evans,  the  Australian  explorer,  306 


r 


condition 

81-87 

11 

1  Jiunaicii, 
Tiismaiila, 
8,  29:} 


Htralia,  20:?, 


Wales,  287 


pain  in  the 
the  site  of 


IXDEX. 

Kyre,  Sir  E  J  ward  John,  the  Australian  explorer,  30S-:j12 
Eyre,  Lake,  Australia,  318,  315) 


387 


Fairwkll,  Lieutenant,  his  nettlement  in  Natal,  17!>,  ISO 

Falkland,  Lord,  his  share  in  coloni/.in*,'  Newfoundland,  7*2 

Fawkner,  John  Pascoe,  his  early  settleintnt  in  Victoria,  242 

Fiji,  early  visits  to,  3r>8,  3'>i)  ;  English  settlements  in,  351) ;  us  an  English 

colony,  3r)9-3t)3 
Fisheries,  Newfoundland,  71-82 
Fitzrcjy,  Sir  Charles,  governor  of  New  Soutli  Wales,  287  ;  of  New  Zealand, 

338.  343 
Flinders,  Captain,  the  Australian  discoverer,  215-217,  22S,  232,  240,  "'.yt), 

293 
Fort  Darwin,  North  Australia,  208,  317 
Forrest,  John  and  Alexander,  Australian  explorers,  317,  318 
Franklin,  Sir  John,  ^'overnor  of  Tasuiania,  2;Jl] 
Freemantle,  Western  Australia,  302,  30G 
Free  Town,  Sierra  Leone,  156 
Frere,  Sir  Bartle,  in  South  Africa,  183,  184 

Gaika,  the  Kaffir  chief,  105-167 

(iranibia,  155,  156 

Gardiner,  Captain  Allen,  in  Natal,  181 

Gawler,  Colonel,  Governor  of  Soutli  Australia,  258,  259 

Geelong,  Victoria,  241,  245,  251 

George  Town,  British  Guiana,  64 

(ieorge  Town,  Tasmania,  232,  235 

(Gibraltar,  151 

Gilbert,    Sir    Humphrey,  his   attempted  colonization  oi   Newfoundland, 

21,  72 
Gipps,  Sir  George,  governor  of  New  South  Wales,  246,  287 
(rlenelg.  Lord;  on  the  Kaffir  wars,  168,  169 
Goderich,  Lord,  on  New  Zealand  atiocities,  327 
Gold  Coast,  the,  156 
Gold  Mines,  of  British    Columbia,    142;  of  Cape  Colonv,  175;  >f  New 

South  Wales,  271,  272,  285  ;  of  Victoria,  272-275,  277-279,  285  ;  of 

Queensland,  297  ;  of  New  Zealand,  339,  353 
Gordon,  Sir  Arthur,  governor  of  New  Zealand,  354  ;  of  Fiji,  302,  363 
Gore-Browne,  Colonel,  governor  of  New  Zealand,  353 
Gozo,  151-153 

Graham,  Colonel,  in  Cape  Colony,  163-165 
Graham's  Town,  165,  166 
Graydon,  Admiral,  in  Newfoundland,  75 
Gregory,  A.,  the  Australian  explorer,  318 
Grey,  Sir  George,  governor  of  South  Australia,  259,  200  ;  his  explorations 

in  West  Australia,  308  ;  his  services  as  governor  of  New  Zealand,  338, 

343,  353 
Guiana,  63,  64 

Habitans,  the  French,  in  Canada,  103-110 
Hamilton,  Ontario,  119 

Hau-Hau  superstition  in  New  Zealand,  the,  349-351 
Hargreaves,  E.  H.,  gold  discovered  in  Australia  by,  272 

25—2 


1!PP 


388 


INDEX. 


% 


li 


Hawkins,  Sir  John,  \\\*   Hlave-trading   expeditions  to  the  African  cnfti.t 

anil  th."  W.'^t  In.litH,  '2f)-.'n.  155 
Ifiiwke'H  15jiv,  New  Zeuhmd,  'iWl 
H..yti,  2H,  4:J,  50 

Head,  Sir  Krutici«,  governor  of  Canada,  116 
Ht'li^iiluiid,  151 

Hi-nty,  Thoniaw,  his  early  settlement  in  Victoria,  241 
Hindniarsh,  Sir  John,  first  governor  of  South  Anstrulia,  258 
llispaniola,  2S,  l.'J 
Hobart,  Tasmania,  232,  235,  241 

Hohson,  Cai»tiiin,  the  first  governor  of  New  Zealand,  331,  335 
Honif  Koti',',  llt'i,  Ut(5 

Hotham,  Sir  Charles,  governor  of  Victoria,  277,  280 
Hottent(.ts,  the,  ISi'-lOl,  KIO,  lt)7,  170,  171 
Hovell,  W.  C,  the  Australian  explorer,  241,  306 
Hoviitt,  Alfred  William,  the  Australian  explorer,  317 
Hudson,  Metuy,  in  America,  72,  121 
Hudson's  Bay  Cotnpany,  the,  121-129 
Hudson's   Bay  Territory,  the,    its  extent  and  character,   122-130;  early 

Hottlements  and  trade  in,  123  ;  its  Indian  natives,  127  ;  its  surrender 

to  Canada,  12!) 
Hughes,  Captain,  in  South  Australia,  265 
Hume,  Hamilton,  the  Australian  explorer,  241,  306 

India,  British,  its  history  and  commerce,  24, 149,  150,  187-190,  378,  379 
Indians.  North  American,  their  early  relations  with  the  French  and  Kngli.vh, 

84-89 
Ipswich,  I2»t!t;n'''lii'"d ,  296 

Jackson,  Colonel,  his  visit  to  Jamaica,  41 

Jamaica,  discovered  by  Columbus  in  1494,  40  ;  his  residence  in  it,  40,  41  ; 
captured  and  almost  depopidated  by  the  Spaniards.  41  ;  first  visited  by 
the  English  (1605),  41  ;  captured  for  Cromwell  by  General  Venables 
(1655),  42,  46  ;  its  first  English  colonists,  42  ;  its  connection  with  the 
buccaneers,  42-48  :  it  pro,'.,'ress  in  the  seventeenth  century,  48  ;  its  losses 
by  earth(|uakes  and  hurricanes  in  1692  and  later  years,  49,  50  ;  its  com- 
mercial importance  in  1728,  51,  52  ;  its  progress  in  the  eighteenth  cen- 
tury, 52  ;  its  condition  as  a  slave  colony,  52-58,  67  ;  tho  insurrection  of 
1760,54,55  ;  the  Consolidated  Slave  Act  of  1792, 56  ;  the  insurrection  of 
1832.  56.  57  ;  the  abolition  of  slavery  in  1834,  58  ;  its  natural  beauties 
and  resources,  65-67  ;  its  degradation  and  the  causes,  07-69  ;  the  chances 
of  its  amelioration,  69,  70 

Jay,  John,  'the  younger,'  his  voyage  in  search  of  Cathay,  19 

Kaffirs,  the,  in  South  Africa,  162-174,  176—186 
Kapunda  Copper  Mines,  South  Australia,  260,  261 
Kennedy,  Sir  Arthur,  govc-rnor  of  Queensland,  299 
Kimberley,  South  Africa,  174 
Kimberley,  Western  Australia,  318 
King,  Captain,  his  account  of  South  Australia,  256 
King  (xeorge's  Sound,  Australia,  309 
King  Movement,  the,  in  New  Zealand,  345 
Kingston,  Jamaica,  48,  54,  68 


f 


rXDEX. 


389 


Kirku,  Sir  Duviil,  his  shiiru  in  colDni/.itig  Nuwfouudland,  72  ;  hid  iiivudiim 

of  Ciinada,  87 
K<»n>rariku,  Nuw  Zealand,  332,  342 
Kowlooi),  1!»6 

Lahradoii,  19,  20 

liabuaii,  lit7,  200 

Layits,  ir»o 

Lande.sborouj^h,  William,  tiio  Australian  explorer,  317 

Lane,  Sir  lialph,  the  Hr.st  governor  of  Virginia,  22 

Latrobe,  Charles  James,  in  Victoria,  21.'),  277 

Lanncr-Hton.  Tasmania,  235 

Lawson,  William,  the  Australian  explorer,  217,  306 

Ltake,  Sir  tfohu,  in  Xewfoundland,  7'» 

Leichhardt,  Dr.,  the  Australian  explorer,  295,  312 

Leigh,  Sir  Olive,  in  Barbados,  32 

Levuka,  3G3 

Ley,  Lord,  in  Harbados,  32 

London,  Ontario,  119 

Lonsdale,  Captain  William,  in  Victoria,  245 

Macauthl'k,  John,  '  the  father  of  New  South  Wales,'  214,  223 

Macartney,  the  Earl  of,  in  Cape  Colony,  161 

Macdonell,  Sir  liichard,  governor  of  South  Australia,  264 

Macomo,  the  Kaffir  chief,  171 

M'Kinlay,  irohn,  the  Australian  explorer,  317 

M'Leay,  Alexander,  in  South  Wales,  248,  249 

M'Nab.  Lieutenant-Colonel,  his  suppression  of  the  Toronto  insurrection  in 

1837,  116 
Macquarie,  General,  governor  of  New  South  Wale-*,  214,  217,  220,  226,  287 
Maccpiarie  River,  217,  306 
Malabars,  the,  of  Ceylon,  193 
Malacca,  194 
Malta,  151-153 

Ma.i':toba,  128,  130,  133,  140,  141 
Manoa,  the  Golden  City  of,  63 
Maoris,  the,  of  New  Zealand,  204,  205,  320-352 
Marlb<jrough,  the  Earl  of,  first  owner  of  Barbados,  32 
Marlborough,  New  Zealand,  337 
Maroons,  the,  of  Jamaica,  42,  48,  53,  54 
Marsden,  Samuel,  and  later  missionaries  in  New  Zealand,  323,  324,  328, 

329,  338 
Maryland,  25 
Mauritius,  201 

May,  Henry,  his  visit  to  the  Bermudas,  59 
Melbourne,  Victoria,  216,  220,  242,  245,  251,  252,  270,  272,  274,  276,  277. 

281,  282 
Metcalf,  Sir  Charles,  governor  of  Canada,  118 
Mitchell,  Sir  Thomas,  the  Australian  explorer,  228,  242,  295,  308 
Montego  Bay,  Jamaica,  56 

Montreal,  84,  38,  90,  95,  104,  105,  109, 110,  117,  120,  138,  139,  140 
Moonta  Copper  Mines,  South  Australia,  265 
Moors,  the,  of  Ceylon,  193 


I 


390 


INDEX. 


¥ 


Moreton  Bay,  Queensland,  293-295 

Morgan,  Sir  Henry,  the  buccaneer,  46-48 

Mount  Alexander  Gold  Fields,  Victoria,  273 

Murchison,   Sir  Roderick,  the  gold  discoveries  in  Australia  anticipated 

by,  272 
Murray,  Lieutenant,  his  discovery  of  Port  Phillip,  240 
Murray  River,  Australia,  228,  242,  206,  264,  307 
Murrumbidgee  River,  Australia,  249,  250,  307 
Musgrave,  Sir  Anthony,  governor  of  Queensland,  299 

Xamaqualand,  South  Africa,  174 

Xapier,  New  Zealand,  337 

Natal,  its  eai-ly  history  and  Kaffir  inhabitants,  177,  178  ;  Dutch  intercourse 
with  it,  179  ;  its  colonization  by  Lieutenant  Fairvvell  (1823),  179,  ISO  ; 
its  second  colonization  (1835),  181  ;  its  later  history,  l8l,  182,  184 

Nelson,  New  Zealand,  337 

New  Brunswick,  its  early  history,  99 ;  its  progress,  99  ;  its  union  with 
Canada,  132  ;  its  present  condition  and  resourcHs,  137 

Newcastle,  New  Brunswick,  fire  at,  in  1825,  100-102 

Newcastle  Coal-Field,  New  South  Wales,  291 

New  England  colonies,  the,  25,  26 

Newfoundland,  discovered  by  John  Cabot  in  1497,  20,  21,  71  ;  visited  by 
Jacques  Cartier,  83  ;  early  fishing  expeditions  to,  20,  71,  72  ;  Sir 
Humphrey  Gilbert's  attempted  colonization  of,  in  1583,  21,  72  ;  the 
first  regular  settlements  in,  72,  73  ;  the  (juarrels  between  the  fishers 
and  the  colonists,  73  ;  French  and  English  struggles  for  possession  of 
the  island,  74-76  ;  its  progress  sinc3  1715,  77  ;  the  cod-fisheries,  78, 
80,  81 ;  seal-hunting,  79  ;  union  with  Canada,  82,  132 

New  Guinea,  discovered  by  Captain  Cook,  204  ;  early  visits  to,  363  ; 
English  traders  and  missionaries  in,  363-366 

New  Leinster,  320.     Set  New  Zealand 

New  Munster,  320.     .SVe  New  Zealand 

New  Plymouth,  New  Zealand,  337 

New  Providence,  60 

New  South  Wales,  Captain  Cook's  visits  to  the  site  of  the  colony,  206- 
208  ;  its  appropriation  as  a  convict  settlement,  210,  231  ;  ';he  first 
planting  of  convicts  at  Port  Jackson  under  Captain  Phillip  (17^7- 
1792),  211,  212  ;  its  convict  population,  212,  213  ;  its  early  governors, 
212,  214;  General  Macquarie's  government  (1810-1821),  214,  220; 
progress  of  the  colony  from  1787  to  1821,  212-219  ;  from  1821  to  L^39, 
221-230;  Sir  Thomas  Brisbane's  government  (1822-1825),  220,  226; 
its  bush-rangers,  221 ;  its  reformed  convicts,  221-223  ;  John  Macarthur 
and  the  wool-trade,  214,  223  ;  its  free  and  convict  population  in  1829, 
224-226  ;  Sir  Ralph  Darling's  government  (1826-1831),  226  ;  politick 
reforms,  226,  227  ;  Sir  Richard  Bourke's  government  (1831-1838), 
226,  227,  246  ;  its  progress  under  him,  227,  228  ;  Sir  (4eorge  Gi))ps's 
government,  246  ;  squatters  in,  247-250  ;  its  progress  from  1839  to 
1851,  250,  251,  254  ;  Sydney  in  1848,  254  ;  progress  of  the  colony 
after  the  separation  of  Victoria  from  it,  270,  284  ;  the  gold  cV 'covjries, 
271,  272;  their  effect,  272,  285,  286  ;  the  establishment  of  Queens- 
land as  an  independent  colony,  287  ;  later  progress  of  New  South 
Wales,  287-292,  368,  369 

New  Ulster,  320.    »S'ee  New  Zealand 


INDEX. 


391 


icipated 


jercourse 
179,  l.sO  ; 
>,  LSI 

lion  with 


visited  bv 
,  7-2  ;  sir 
L,  72  ;  the 
the  fishers 
^session  of 
hories,  78, 

to,  303  ; 


[lony,  206- 
••ihe  first 
Hip  (17S7- 
Igovernors, 

12U,   220; 
;i  tolN3y, 
220,  226  ; 
^lacarthur 
in  1829. 
;  politicid 
s31-lS8S), 
Gii^ps's 
183'."  to 
Ihe  colony 
-covjries, 
If  (.Jueens- 
few   South 


New  Zealand,  its  earlv  inhabitants,  320  ;  Captain  Cook'.s  visits,  201-206, 
20s,  321  ;  early  Kni,'lish  intercourse  with  it,  321  ;  the  massacre  of  the 
crew  of  tlie  lioyd  (1809),  321-323  ;  missionary  work  in  it,  323,  324, 
329,  337,  338  ;  the  first  traders  and  their  influences,  32-l-;V2S  ;  the 
character  of  the  Maoris,  32S-331  ;  the  beginning  of  JMiglish  coloniza- 
tion, 328  ;  the  New  Zealand  Company,  332-337  ;  establishment  of  the 
colony  (1S3!>,  ISIO),  333-335  ;  Captain  Hobson's  rule  as  first  governor 
(1S40-1S12),  33".,  336,  338  ;  growth  of  the  white  population,  336, 
341;  the  nine  provinces  (jf  New  Zealand,  337,  338;  its  cnminercial 
progress,  339  ;  tlie  gradual  displacement  of  its  Maori  inhabitants, 
338,  340,  341  ;  Colonel  Wakefield's  aggression  in  1843,  and  -ts  conse- 
quences, 341-343  ;  Sir  George  Grey's  government,  338,  343,  353,  354  ; 
rise  of  tlie  King-movement,  345,  346  ;  the  disturbances  of  1860,  346  ; 
warfare  between  1862  and  1869,  347-351  ;  the  Hau-Hau  superstition, 
349-351  ;  the  dying  out  of  the  Maoris,  352  ;  its  recent  history  and 
prospects,  353-357,  370 

Niagara,  91,  112 

Nicholson,  General,  first  governor  of  Nova  Scotia,  96 

Norfolk  liland,  Australia,  231 

Normanby,  Lord,  governor  of  Victoria,  282  ;  of  Queensland,  299 

North  Australia,  268,  269,  315-317 

Nova  Scotia,  colonized  by  the  French  (1604),  84,  85,  96  ;  conquered  by 
the  P]nglish  (1614),  86,  96  ;  retaken  by  the  French  (1667),  96  ;  finally 
transferred  to  the  English  (IT"*  3),  90,96  ;  its  early  French  inhabitants 
— their  expulsion  in  1755,  and  return,  96,  97  ;  its  progress  as  an  English 
colony,  98,  99  ;  its  imion  with  Canad?.,  132  ;  its  present  condition  and 
resources,  136,  137 

Ontario,  132,  139,  140 

Orange  Free  State,  172-174 

Osborn,  Captain  Henry,  first  governor  of  Newfoundland,  76 

Otago,  New  Zealand,  337,  339 

Ottawa,  Ontario,  119,  132,  140 

Oxley,  the  Australian  explorer,  293,  306 

Pai-marire  superstition  in  New  Zealand,  the,  349-351 

Parkhnrst,  Anthony,  71 

PatotitU,  the  Maori,  345 

Penang,  194 

Perth,  Western  Australia,  302,  306 

Phillip,  Captain  Arthur,  first  governor  of  New  South  Wales,  211,  212,  215 

Pitch  Lake  of  Trinidp.d,  the,  64 

Placentia,  Newfoundland,  74,  75 

Pocahontas,  25 

Pondoland,  174 

Port  Elizabeth,  Cape  Colony,  167,  171 

Port  Essington,  Australia,  312 

Port  Jackson,  New  South  Wales,  211,  220,  289 

Port  Louis,  Mauritius,  201 

Port  Mac(iuarie,  New  South  Wales,  220,  228,  233 

Port  Maria,  Jamaica,  54 

Port  Phillip,  Victoria,  220,  228,  243,  306 

Port  Phillip  District.     iS'ce  Victoria,  Australia 


392 


INDEX. 


Port  Royal,  Jam.iica,  a  buccaneer  haunt  in  the  seventeenth  century,  48  ; 

destroyed  by  an  earthquake  in  1092,  -19,  50,  (38 
Port  Royal,  Nova  Scotia,  85,  80 

Prince  Edward  Island,  its  history,  102,  132  ;  its  present  condition,  ]3i,  135 
Prince  Rupert's  Land,  122 

QuKBKC,  the  city,  84,  85,  87,  88,  90,  93-95,  104,  105,  110,  124,  138,  140 

Quebec,  the  province,  132,  138-140 

C^ueensland,  its  early  exploration,  293-295,  312  ;  its  separation  from  Nf\v 

South  Wales  and  establishment  as  a  separate  colony  (1859),  287,  29(J  ; 

its  progress  and  prospects,  291,  293-299,  308,  309 

Raffles,  Sih  Stamfoud,  capture  of  Singiiport.  by,  195 

Raleigh,  Sir  Walter,  his  attempted  colonization  of  Virginia,  22,  23  ;  his 

expeditions  to  Guiana,  03 
Red  River  Settlement,  the,  128,  141 
Ristigouche  River,  New  Brunswick,  137 
Robinson,  Sir  Hercules,  governor  of  New  South  Wales,  2S8,  361  ;  of  New 

Zealand,  354 
Rockhampton,  Queensland,  291,  297 
Rotumah,  364 

Sable  Island,  84 

Saint  Christopher,  or  St.  Kitts,  first  colonized  by  the  English,  32 

Saint  John's,  Newfoundland,  75,  78 

Saint  Lawrence,  Gulf  and  River  of,  83,  84,  87,  88,  94, 102, 105,  134, 138, 139 

San  Dt>mingo,  '/8 

Sandwich,  Canada,  112 

Sarawak,  197-200 

Saskatchewan,  128,  142 

Seal-hunting,  Newfoundland,  79,  80 

Selwy      Bishop,  in  New  Zealand,  342 

Seychelles  Islands,  the,  201 

Shepstone,  Sir  Theophilus,  in  Natal,  183 

Shirley,  Sir  Anthony,  his  visit  to  Jamaica,  41 

Sierra-Leone,  155,  156 

Singapore,  194,  195 

Sinhalese,  the,  193 

Slaves,  African,  in  Barbados,  36-38  ;  in  Jamaica,  42,  48,  52-58,  69  ;  in 
Antigua,  61  ;  in  Cape  Colony,  160,  161,  173 

Slaves,  Caribbean,  in  tlie  West  Indies,  31,  41 

Slaves,  English,  in  Barbados,  36 

Smith,  Captain  John,  24 

Smith,  Sir  Harry,  in  Cape  Colony,,  168-171,  173 

Somers,  Sir  George,  his  visits  to  the  Bermudas,  59 

Somerset,  Lord  Charles,  governor  of  Cape  Colony,  165 

South  Australia,  its  discovery,  256,  257  ;  its  colonization  on  the  Wakefield 
scheme  (1830),  257  ;  its  first  governors.  Captain  Hindmar.-h  and 
Colonel  Gawler,  and  its  early  troubles  (1836-1841),  258,  259  ;  its  im- 
proved condition  under  Sir  George  Grey  (1841-1845),  259,  200  ;  and 
Sir  Henry  Young  (1848-1854),  203,  264,  270  ;  its  copper  and  lead  miius, 
260,  261,  265  ;  effects  of  the  gold  discoveries,  202-204  ;  its  progress 
under  Sir  Richard  Macdonell  (1853-1862),  264  ;  its  wool  trade,  260  ; 


INDEX. 


393 


iry,  48  ; 
134,13;') 

110 

nm  "SfW 
;S7,  29ii  ; 

,  23  ;  his 

;  of  New 


4,138,139 


r.8,  69  ;  in 


IWakefifld 
InarHh  and 
li)  ;  its  iin- 
260  ;  and 
lead  mines, 
Is  pi'ojrress 
lade,  266  ; 


its  wheat  trade,  266  ;  its  wine  trade,  266,  267  ;  its  present  condition, 
267,  268,  368  ;  its  northern  territory,  268,  317,  318,  368 

Spanish  Town,  Jamaica,  48 

Squatters,  Australian,  227,  246-250 

Stockenstrom,  Mr.,  in  Cape  Colony,  164,  165 

Strahan,  Sir  G.  C,  governor  of  Tasmania,  238 

Straits  Settlements,  the,  194,  195 

Strzelecki,  Count,  his  discovery  of  ;old  in  Australia,  271 

Stuart,  John  M'Douall,  the  Australian  explorer,  312-315 

Sturt,  Captain,  the  Australian  explorer,  228,  256,  257,  307,  308,  312, 313 

Suva,  Fiji,  36S 

Swan  River,  Western  Australia,  300-302 

Sydney,  New  South  Wales,  211,  214,  217,  220,  224,  225,  228,  254,  284, 
285,  288,  289,  306,  321 

Taranaki,  New  Zealand,  337,  344,  347,  349 

Tasman,  Abel  Jansen,  202 

Tasmania,  its  discovery,  202  ;  Captain  Cook's  visit  to  it,  208  ;  its  insularity 
proved  by  Bass  and.  Flinders,  216  ;  its  adoption  and  early  progress  as 
a  convict  settlement,  232,  233  ;  its  bush-rangers,  233-235  ;  its  refor- 
mation and  growth,  233,  235  ,  its  governors — Sir  George  Arthur,  233, 
235  ;  Sir  John  Franklin,  236  ;  its  progress  and  present  condition,  237- 
239,  369 

Te  Ranga,  New  Zealand,  349 

Thakombau,  King,  of  Fiji,  359-361 

Thompson,  Charles  Poulett,  governor  of  Canada,  118 

Tippahee,  the  Maori,  321,  322 

Toronto,  113,  116,  119,  139,  140 

Torrens,  Lake,  Australia,  309,  313,  318 

Tortuga,  45,  46 

Transvaal,  the,  174,  182,  184,  185 

Trinidad,  its  history  and  present  condition,  64,  65 

Truganina,  or  Lalla  Rookh,  the  last  of  the  Tasmanians,  239 

Tufton,  Sir  William,  governor  of  Barbados,  32 

Udinquan,  the  Zulu  chief,  180,  181 

United  States  of  America,  the,  their  commencement  and  early  history, 

22-26,  148  ;  their  Canadian  wars,  89-95, 104, 105, 111-114 
Usibipu,  the  Zulu  chief,  184 
Utshaka  or  Cbaku,  the  Zulu  chief,  180 

Vancouver,  British  Columbia,  144 

Vancouver  Island,  its  early  history,  128,  129  ;  its  formation  as  a  colony 

(1848),  129, 149  ;  its  union  with  British  Columbia  (1866),  129, 130  ; 

its  condition  and  resources,  143-145 
Van  Diemen's  Land.    Ste.  Tasmania. 
Veddas,  the,  of  Ceylon,  193 

Venables,  General,  conquest  of  Jamaica  by,  in  1655,  41,  46 
Verazzano,  GioTanni,  exploration  of  North  America  by,  83 
Victoria,  or  the  Port  Phillip  District,  Australia,  its  discovery,  240  ;  its 

colonization  attempted  (1803),  and  early  settlements  in,  241,  242 ; 

Mitchell's  visits  to,  228,  242  ;  William  Buckley's  wanderings  ia,  243- 

245  ;  its  formal  oecupation  under  Sir  Richard  Bourke,  245  ;  its  early 


^m 


394 


INDEX, 


h 


progress  as  a  province  of  New  South  Wales,  245,  250,  251  ;  Melbourne 
in  1838,  251,  252  ;  its  establishment  as  an  independent  colony  (1851), 
270  ;  the  gold  discoveries,  271,  272  ;  their  effects  on  the  colony,  273- 
275  ;  its  recent  progress,  275-277  ;  the  growth  of  Melbourne,  276  ; 
the  Ballarat  outbreak  (1854),  277-279  ;  political  changes  in  Victoria, 
279-282 

Victoria,  British  Columbia,  144 

Victoria,  Hong  Kong,  195,  196 

Victoria  Lake,  South  Aiistralia,  256,  257 

Victoria  River,  North  Australia,  296 

Virginia,  24 

Vogel,  Sir  Julius,  in  New  Zealand,  354 

Waikato,  New  Zealand,  347,  348 

Waimati,  New  Zealand,  329 

Waitara,  New  Zealand,  345,  346 

Wakefield,  Colonel,  in  New  Zealand,  333 

Wakef.Jd  Scheme  of  Colonization,  the,  in  South  Australia,  257-260  ;  in 

New  Zealand,  332-336,  341,  342 
Walker,  Frederick,  the  Australian  explorer,  317 
Wallaroo  Copper  Mines,  South  Australia,  265 
Warner,  Sir  Thomas,  colonizer  of  Antigua,  61 
Weld,  Sir  F.  G.,  governor  of  Tasmania,  238 
Wellington,  New  Zealand,  337,  354 
Wentworth,  William  Charles,  the  Australian  explorer  and  statesman,  217- 

219,  287,  306 
West  Griqualand,  South  Africa,  174 

West  Indies,  our  colonies  in  the,  28-70.     {See  names  of  Islands.) 
Western  Australia,  its  early  explorations,  300  ;  its  unfortunate  colonization 
(1829-1832),  300-302  ;  its  subsequent  progress,  302,  303;  its  convicts, 
303,  304  ;  its  present  condition,  305,  368 
Westland,  New  Zealand,  337 
WilloughlDy  of  Parham,  Lord,  governor  of  Barbados,  33-37;  his  reconquest 

of  Antigua,  61 
Wills,  William  John,  the  Australian  explorer,  315-317 
Wilmot,  Sir  Eardly,  governor  of  Tasmania,  237 
Winnipeg,  Manitoba,  141 
Wirimu  Tamihana,  the  Maori,  345 
Wolfe,  General  James,   his  capture  of    Cape  Breton,  92  ;  his  siege  of 

Quebec  and  death,  92-95 
Wolseley,  Lord,  in  Canada,  141 


/; 


PR 


Yorke's  PENINSULA;  South  Australia,  265 

Young,  Sir  Henry,  governor  of  South  Australia,  264 

Zulus,  the,  177-182 


THB  KND. 


\\m- 


ll    11!: 


BILLINS  «  SONS,  PRINTERS,  QUILOrORO. 


V 


AN    ILLUSTRATED 


ISt  O 


ooks 


^rom  a  SbllUiifl  to  a  (Buinca, 

TN    THE    DEPARTMENTS    OF   BIOGRAPHY,    HISTORY, 

ADVENTURE,  TALES  AND  ROMANCES,  FOLK-LORE, 

POETRY,    COOKERY,    MEDICINE,    COMMERCE, 

REFERENCE,    LAW,    NATURAL  HISTORY, 

ETIQUETTE,  •     ENGLISH       CLASSICS, 

SELF-CULTURE  AND  SELF-HELP, 

JUVENILE   BOOKS 

(SEVERAL  SERIES), 

Is.  to  Ik.  6f/., 

ETC. 

SUITABLE   FOR 

THE   FAMILY  CIRCLE,   THE   LIBRARY, 
PRESENTATION,     SCHOOL     PRIZES,    Etc. 


I 


siege  of 


PUBLISHED  BY 

JOHN    HOGG, 

13,  PATERNOSTER  ROW,   LONDON,   E.C. 


CONTENTS   OF  CATALOGUE, 

ALPHABETICALLX  CLASSIFIED. 


Books  @  Is. 


1  : 


It  ' 


,t 

t          ^ 

i 

k 

i    i 

PAGE 

Afternoon  Tea  Book,  The  .11 

Band  of  Mercy  Guide  to  Natural 

History,  The  .  .  .  .12 
Black  and  White  .  .  ,  .30 
Canterbury  Tale,  A  .  .  .30 
Cookery  Primer,  The      .         .        .11 

Cousin  Deb 30 

Dainty  Dishes  {cheap  edition)         .     4 

Depression 10 

Dolly's  Adventures ....  30 
Drinks  of  All  Kinds        .  .11 

Exiled 30 

Father  Christmas's  Stories     .        .  30 
Fortunes  of  Ruby,  Pearl,  and  Dia- 
mond, The 30 

Housewife's  Handy-Book,  The       .  11 

Books  (g 
Boys  of  Priors  Deau,  The  ,  .  28 
Children's  Evergreens  .  .  .28 
Cocky,  Clucky,  and  Cackle  .  ,  28 
Dictionary  of  1,000  Christian  Names  10 
If  Wishes  were  Horses,  etc.  .  .  28 
Little  Neighbours  in  London  .  .  28 
Living  Story,  A  .  .  .  .28 
Meg  and  Olive         .        .        ,        .  28 

Books  @ 

Ada   Norman's   Trials   and    DifiS- 

culties 23 

Adventures  in  the  Ice  .  .  .24 
Brave  Little  Women  .  .  .23 
Burgomaster's  Daughter,  The  .  23 
Every  Cloud  has  its  Silver  Lining  .  22 
Facts  and  Phases  of  Animal  Life  .  12 
Famous  London  Merchants  .  .  24 
Far-famed  Tales  from  the  Arabian 

Nights 22 

Fortunate  Men:    How  they  made 

Money  and  won  Renown  .  .  23 
Gilbert's  First  Voyage  .  .  .23 
Habits  of  Good  Society,  The  .        .  24 


PAGE 

Lad  from  London,  The   .        .        .30 

Little  King  I 30 

Namesakes 4 

Palace  of  Ideas.  The        .        .        .30 

Plucky  Rex ••,() 

Self-Help  for  Women      .        .        .7 
Toothsome  Dishes  .  ,  li 

Uncle  Tom's  Cabin  {ahridged)  .  30 
Under  the  Walnut-tree  .  .  .30 
Ups  and  Downs  of  a  Sixpence,  The  30 
Wanted,  a  Wife  {new  edition) 
We  Four  Children  . 
What    shall  we   have   for  Break 

fast? 

Will-making  made  Safe  and  Easy 
Will,  The  Way  to  Prove  a 

Is.  6d. 

Noel  and  GcofT 

Red  Herring    .... 

Scripture  Animals  . 

Songs  ami  Poems  for  Children 

Strange  Exhibition,  A     . 

Tale  Told  by  Two,  A       . 

That  Boy  Jack 

Up  in  the  Old  Pear-tree  . 

2s.  6d. 

Mottoes  and  Aphorisms  from  Shake 

speare  .... 
One  Thing  at  a  Time 
Out  and  About 
Phil  Thorndyke's  Adventures 
Pioneers  of  Civilisation  . 
Plodding  On    . 
Shoes  of  Fortune,  The^    . 
Small  Beginnings    . 
Steady  Aim,  The     . 
Story  of  Herbert  Archer,  The 
Versification,  Hood's  Guide  to 
Watchers  for  the  Dawn  . 
Wonderful  Animals 


4 
80 

11 

10 
10 


28 
28 
12 
28 
28 
28 
28 
28 


26 
22 
23 
20 
24 
22 
22 
24 
23 
20 
20 
24 
12 


CLASSIFIED  CONTENTS— C07l//«Me(/. 


Christian  Year,  The 


Books  j!  3s. 


PAGE     I 

.81    Yiciir  of  WnkeGelfl,  The 


PAOK 

.     8 


Books  @  3s.  6d. 


Adventures  of  Maurice  Druminore . 

Birthdfty-Book  of  Art  and  Artists  . 

Book  of  Boyhoods,  A      .        .        . 

Boys  and  their  Ways 

Church  Seasons,  The 

Dainty  Dishes         .... 

Evenings  Away  from  Home    . 

Exemplary  Women 

Few  Good  Women,  A      .        .        . 

Footsteps  to  Fame  .... 

Girls  and  their  Ways 

Glass  of  Fashion,  The     . 

Great  Movements    .... 

Landmarks  of  English  Literature  . 

Martyrs  to  Freedom 

Master  Minds  in  Art,  Science,  and 

Letters 

Matthew  Flinders ;  or,  How  we  have 

Australia 

Ocean  Wave,  The   .... 


20 

Our  Home-made  Stories . 

14 

•21 

Our  Redcoats  and  Bluejackets 

IG 

14 

Parlour  Menagerie,  The  . 

P2 

•21 

Pilgrim's  Progress,  The  . 

I!) 

18 

Plain  Living  and  High  Thinking 

•21 

11 

Redskin  and  Paleface 

.  14 

11 

Robinson  Crusoe,  Life  and  Adven 

18 

tures  of        .... 

19 

18 

Romance  of  the  Forests  . 

14 

17 

Romance  of  the  Mountains     . 

14 

•21 

Royal  Children 

18 

•20 

Secret  of  Success,  The    . 

16 

17 

Some  Historic  Women    . 

18 

17 

Stories  of  Young  Adventurers 

14 

16 

Stories  out  of  School  Time 

14 

Technical  Dictionary,  A  Popular    . 

17 

19 

Uncle  Tom's  Cabin . 

19 

Under  the  Naga  Banner . 

.<) 

.'•) 

Young  Days  of  Authors  . 

14 

•20 

Your  Luck's  in  your  Hand 

•20 

Books  @  4s.  6d.,  6s.,  6s.  6d 

21s.,  and 

De  Quincey,  Thomas  :  his  Life  and         [ 

Writhigs,  6/.        ....     8 
Directorium  Auglicanum,  The,  '21/-   '26 
From  Snowdon  to  the  Sea,  6/-        .  32 
Glimpses  of  Welsh  Life  and  Cha- 
racter, 6/- 32 

Golden  Girls,  4/6  .  .  .  .8 
Hours  in  my  Garden,  6/-  .  .9 
In  Perils  Oft,  6/-  .  .  .  .7 
Land  of  Arthur,  The,  6/-  .  .  32 
Makers  of  British  India,  The,  4/6  .     8 


.,  7s.  6d.,  10s.  6d.,  12s.  6d., 
31s.  6d. 

Man  and  his  Maladies,  6/-  .  .7 
Manuale  Clericorum,  The,  7/6  .  26 
Noble  Name,  A,  4/6  .  .  .3 
Robinson  Crusoe,  7/6  and  12/6  .  10 
Soldiers'  Storips  and  Sailors'  Yarns, 

4/6 8 

Story  of  our  Colonies,  The,  4/6  .  8 
Whist-Table,  The,  10/6  -  .  .  y 
Whist -Table,    The    [large  •  paper 

edition),  31/6  ....     9 

Woman's  Work  and  Worth,  6/6      .    7 


NEW  BOOKS  AND  NEW  EDITIONS. 


New  Edition,  completing  25th  Thousand. 

WANTED  A  WIFE!  A  Story  of  the  60th 
Dragoons ;  and  other  Tales.  By  John  Strange  WiNTEit, 
Author  of  "  Bootle's  Baby,"  "  Houp-La !"  etc.,  Angelo 
J.  Lewis,  and  W.  W.  Fenn.  With  Pictorial  Wrapper  and 
Illustrations  by  F.  W.  Burton.  Crown  8vo.,  IGO  pages. 
Price  Is. 

"The  opening  tale  is  as  successful  in  ita  portrayal  of  military  life  as  it  is 
brimful  of  humour." — Litcmry  World. 


New  Vol.  of  the  Illustrated  Is.  Juveniles. 

Attractively  bound  in  the  new  and  effective  Chromatic  Style,  four  Colours 
and  Gold.     Small  crown  Svo.,  128  pages,  cloth. 

NAMESAKES.       By    Margaret    Haycraft, 

Author  of  "  Myrtle  and  liue,"  etc.     With  Illustrations  by 
Sidney  Filmore. 

CONTENTS. 
The  Children  of  Heathlands.     {      In  Heathborough  Pond. 
New  Companions.  A  Little  Wanderer. 

A  Bargain  with  Sandy.  •      Rescued  from  the  Storm. 

Sandy  and  Old  Peter.  >      Home,  5weet  Home. 

1^  This  Series  now  numbers  Sixteen  Volumes.    See  paije  30. 


DAINTY    DISHES.      By  the  late  Countess 

Ml'NSTER. 

A  Cheap  Edition  (the  Twelfth)  of  this  Celebrated  Cookery  Book. 

See  page  11. 

Crown  8vo.,  128  pages.    Fancy  Paper  Boards,  price  Is. 


(4)        London :  John  Hogg,  13,  Paternoster  Bow,  E.C. 


!  <K 


NEW  BOOKS  OF  TRAVEL  AND  ADVENTURE. 

MATTHEW  FLINDERS;  or.  How  we 

have  Australia.  Being  the  True  Story  of  Captain  Flinders' 
Adventures  and  Explorations.  By  Kobeut  Tiivnne,  Author 
of  "The  Story  of  Australian  Exploration."  With  Nine  Illus- 
trations and  a  Chart. 

Crown  8vo.,  352  pp.,  cloth,  price  3s.  6d.,  gilt  edges,  43. 

EXTHACT   FllOM    AUTHOR'S    INTRODUCTION. 

"  When  firHt  I  disembarked  on  '  the  Wharf '  at  Melbourne,  I  found  myself 
in  '  Flinders  Street,'  a  frontage  of  bonded  warehouses,  wool  store?,  and  ship- 
ping offices  on  one  side,  and  the  Yarra  Yarra  on  the  other.  I  had  no  previous 
knowledge  why  it  should  be  so  called.  Those  I  asked  could  afford  me  no 
information.  Oral  tradition  had  it  that  Matthew  Flinders  entered,  and 
mapped,  the  large  estuary  which  was  to  be  Port  Phillip,  and  which  was  to 
lead  to  the  Melbourne  which  now  is — and  that  was  about  all.  Of  which 
incident,  more  in  its  proper  place. 

"But  I  was  not  to  be  eatistied,  and  my  curiosity  grew  with  some  years' 
residence  in  the  city.  By  degrees,  and  after  a  diligent  '  hunting  up  of 
authorities,'  I  found  it  was  not  by  any  means  all ;  that  there  was  a  story  so 
deeply  interesting,  as — not  to  interrupt  it — ta  lead  me  to  venture  on  this 
brief  introduction.  In  it,  I  trust,  will  be  met  what  the  more  prosaic  reader 
may  require  before  taking  an  interest  in  the  scenes  and  characters  to  be 
placed  at  his  disposal.  Those  who  prefer  the  more  adventurous  portion  can 
pass  on  with  the  assurance  that  in  it  fact  has  not  been  sacrificed  to  romance. " 


UNDER  THE  NAGA  BANNER.     By 

Charles  J.  Manseord,  Author  of  "Shafts  from  an  Eastern 
Quiver,"  etc.  With  Eight  Illustrations  by  J.  Ay  ton  Symington. 

Crown  8vo.,  352  pp.,  cloth,  price  3s.  6d.,  gilt  edges,  la. 

Extract  from  Author's  Preface. 

"I  am  not  acquainted  with  any  work  of  adventure  located  in  the  dis- 
trict inhabited  by  the  '  fierce '  Nagas,  nor,  indeed,  does  there  appear  to  be 
much  literature  dealing  with  these  interesting  and  remarkable  tribes  of  the 
Province  of  Assam.  .  .  .  The  Nagas,  the  '  Naked '  or  •  Snake '  people,  in- 
habit a  district  lying  between  Nowgong  and  Manipur.  Both  hills  and  valleys 
are  covered  with  dense  jungle,  which  renders  the  district  extremely  difficult 
of  exploration.  It  is  inhabited  by  a  great  number  of  tribes,  speaking  distinct 
dialects,  and  virtually  independent,  although  the  district  has  been  adminis- 
tered  as  British  territory  since  1881.  .   .  . 

•  *  Of  the  tribes  dealt  with  in  the  following  pages,  the  Kukis  are  immigrants 
from  the  mountainous  districts  near  Tipperah  and  Chittagong  ;  and  I  have 
endeavoured  incidentally,  but  with  due  regard  for  the  feelings  of  readers  who 
jio  not  hunger  after  dry-bread  details  in  an  avowed  work  of  fiction,  to  describe 
the  Angrmis  and  their  customs,  since  they  are  the  backbone  of  the  Naga 
tribes.  The  Matai  Nagas,  as  well  as  the  workers  in  gold,  belong  to  a  region 
not  bounded  by  geographers." 

London :  John  Hogg,  13,  Fatemostor  Bow,  £.0.       (5) 


m: 


! 

■    I  t 

1  ! 

"M     ! 

!    I 

!,■' 

n 

li 


I.'  •!' 


••ft,     ^^<*»^  *  ^^ 


J   y  A>^  .  " y/ e    "--J 


DANGER  BEFORE  AND  BEHIND. 


SPECIMEN   ILLUSTRATION 

From  *' Naya  Banner''  (3s.  6rf.  Books). 


NEW  HANDBOOK  OF  DOMESTIC  MEDICINE,  ETC. 
Cruvtm  8vo.,  496  pp.,  cloth,  price  6a. 

Man  and  his  Maladies;  or,  The  Way  to 

Health.     A  Popular  Handbook  of  PhyHiology  and  Domestic  Medicine 
in  Accord  with  the  Advance  in  Medical  Science.     By  A.  E.  Bridokb, 
B.A.,  M.D.,  B.Sc,  F.R.C.P.E.,  Author  of  ••  Depression,"  etc. 
Part  I.— THE  SCIENCE  OP  MEDICINE. 
Part  II.— THE  ART  OF  HEALING. 


"This  is  an  oxcollont  book,  which  ought 
to  bo  of  great  vahie  In  tho  homo8  of  intelli- 
goutpooplo." — MancheBter  Examiner. 

"  Tlio  style  of  this  book  entices  the  reader 
at  the  outset.  .  .  .  It  is  a  welcome  advance 
on  those  of  its  kind  which  have  gone 
before.'' — Glasgow  Herald. 

"A  comforting  treatise  on  disease 

The  work  is  not  so  much  philosophic  as 

Sractical,  being  designed  as  a  handbook  to 
oraestic  medicine."— £t««rj)ooi  Courier. 
"It  certainly  is  a  departure  from  the 
usual  style  of  books  on  the  domestic  treat- 
ment of  disoase Via  hope  this  book 

will  be  read  by  many." — Literary  Wm-ld. 


"A  plain  and  intoUigiblo  handbook  of 
physiology  and  home  modicliio  abreast  of 
the  latest  discoveries."- .flooAd^ifer. 

"  No  house,  espociiiUy  lu  the  country, 
should  bo  without  this  excellent  haud- 
book." — Perthshire  Advurtiaer. 

"It  would  perhaps  bo  well  for  suffering 
humanity  if  some  of  the  views  so  ably  ex- 
pounilod  wore  more  generally  hoM  by .  .  . 
the  medical  profession."— A/ocniHjr  Post. 

"A  sensible  practical  guide  to  physical 
well-being  and  the  mental  well-being  which 
is  HO  closely  allied  fo  it." — Spectator. 

"  The  book  deserves  to  be  not  merely 
read  but  studied."— fii/cM.^ow  Dailu  Mail. 


WITH  (SIXTEEN  ILLUSTRATIONS. 
Crovm  8vo.,  544  pp.,  cloth,  bevelled  boards,  price  6a.  ;  gilt  edges,  68.  6d. 

"In   Perils  Oft."     Romantic  Biogra- 

phiefi  Illustrative  of  the  Adventurous  Life.    By  W.  H.  Daven- 
port Adams,  Author  of  "  Plain  Living  and  High  Thinking,"  etc. 


"The  Author  is  no  dry  historian,  and 
these  stories  of  adventurous  lives  are  sure 
to  be  popular."— S<a/Kiarrf. 

"  The  plan  is  admirable."— Scotsman. 

"  Fiction  cannot  hope  to  rival  in  interest 
the  actual  doinus  of  tliese  wonderful  men, 
whose  noble  lives  are  an  ornament  to 
humanity."— fira(tA>»'d  Observer. 


"  A  book  to  rouse  a  spirit  of  nenerous 
emulation  in  the  yum\i:."—Cli ri.-^tia n  Wurhl. 

"  Here  surul^'  is  enough  to  set  tivery  ))oy  in 
the  town  lonj;inj,'  to  net  hold  of  tlie  book."— 
Shrjliuld  Indfiiiuidcnt.  [Herald. 

"The  book  is  a  capital  one."  -(>lanqow 

"Well  written,  well  printed,  well  got  up, 
and  well  illustrated."- Oitrtrdion. 


Crown  8vo.,  576  pp.,  cloth,  price  6s.  6d. ;  gilt  edges,  78. 

Woman's  Work  and  Worth  in  Girl- 
hood, Maidenhood,  and  Wifehood.  With  Hints  on  Self- 
Culture  and  Chapters  on  the  Higher  Education  and  Employ- 
ment of  Women.    By  W.  H.  Davenport  Adams. 

"  It  is  a  small  thing  to  say  that  it  is  excellent,  and  it  is  only  justice  to  add  that  this  all-im- 

lasterly,  erudite,  charming."—SoctaJ  ^o<es. 

iris,  and  pure  and  unexceptionable  in  tone, 
I,  and  deserves  a  wide  circulation."— £n(/iij/i- 
tooman's  Beview.  .  .^  .  . 

"  It  is  a  noble  record  of  the  work  of  woman and  one  of  the  very  best  books  whlcn 

can  be  placed  in  the  hands  of  a  girl."— Scholastic  World. 


y  that  it  is  excellent,  and  it  is  only 
;n  in  a  stvle  at  once  masterly,  erud 
"As  an  aid  and  incitement  to  self-culture  in  girls,  and  pure  ana  unexceptional 
this  book  may  be  very  thoroughly  recommendea,  and  deserves  a  wide  circulation.' 

AOnivM  J<mit,%^it      "DjtAtA  AAJ« 


120  pp.,  small  crown  8vo.,  boards,  price  Is. ;  or  bound  in  cloth,  Is.  6d. 

Self-Help  for  Women  :   A  Guide  to 

Business.  With  Practical  Directions  for  Establishing  and  Con- 
ducting Remunerative  Trades  and  Business  Occupations  suitable 
for  Women  and  Girls.    By  A  Woman  of  Business. 


"  Her  shrewd  practical  hints  cannot  fail 
to  be  of  value  to  an  increasing  class  of  the 
community,  the  women  who  are  left  to  fight 
their  own  way  in  the  world."— £c/io. 


"  A  shilling  laid  out  in  the  purchase  of 
this  little  book  will  prove  a  far  better  invest- 
ment than  the  waste  of  postage  stamps  in 
replying  to  letters."— Stationer. 


London  :  John  Hogg,  13,  Paternoster  Row,  E.O.       (7; 


"TW 


|ii  :i 


h 


New,  Reviged,  and  Cheaper  Edition,  with  Portraits,  etc.,  price  Gs. 

Thomas   de  Quincey:    his  Life  and 

Writings.  With  Unpablished  Correspondence.  By  Alexanduk 
H.  Japp,  LL.D.,  F.R.8.E.,  Authc^of  "Memoir  of  Hawthorne," etc. 
"  The  flolo  original  ntorehouao  of  blogra>  I  "An  Invaltiable  aid  for  the  Htudont  of  De 
phlcal  information  on  Do  Qtilncoy.  .  .  .Dr.  |  Quincey  and  his  f^onoration.  "—ifcAo. 
Japp  la  to  bu  prainod  for  having  colloctod  i  "No  doubt  Dr.  Japp'a  work  will  now  be 
probably  moat  thinga  that  are  to  bu  known  acueptod  aa  the  authoritative  life  of  De 
about  the  Oi)l>im-oator."— .Stttwrrfay  Review,    I    Quincey."— /^eintto  of  Reviewt. 

^rown  8vo.,  cloth,  price  48.  Gd.  each. 

1.  Golden  Girls  :  A  Picture  Gallery.     By  Alan 

Mdir,  Author  of  "  Children's  Children,"  "  Lady  Beauty,"  etc.    A  New 
Edition,  revised  by  the  Author.   With  a  Frontispiece  by  F.  W.  Burton. 
"  •  Coldcn  Girla '  la  as  pretty  a  atory  as  Mr.  Mulr  has  written.  '—Athenceum. 

2.  A  Noble  Name,  and  How  it  was  Up- 

held.     The  last  Novel  by  the  Author  of  "  Jennie  of  the  Prince's,"  etc. 
A  New  and  Revised  Edition.     With  a  Frontispiece  by  F.  W.  Burton. 
"  It  Is  long  ainco  wo  have  road  anything  which  has  charmed  and  intereatod  ua  more."— 
Manchester  Examiner  and  Time$. 

3.  Soldiers'  Stories  and  Sailors'  Yams.    A 

Book  of  Mess -Table  Drollery  and  Reminiscences  picked  up  Ashore  and 
Afloat,  by  Officers,  Naval,  Military,  and  Medical.     Third  and  cheaper 
Edition.  Illustrated  by  Harry  Furniss,  P.  Macquoid,  and  D.  H.  Friston. 
"  We  muat  read  on  till  the  last  story  la  finished."— OMAam  Chronicle. 

Second  Edition,  revised  to  date. 

4.  The  Makers  of  British  India.    His- 

torical and  Biographical.  From  1600  to  the  Present  Time.    By 

W.  H.  Davenport  Adams.    With  a  Map  and  12  Illustrations. 

(4r.  6d.  ;  gilt  edges,  5s.) 

"  Exactly  the  book  that  Is  wanted  to  give 

to  Engliali  BchoolboyH  an  account  of  the 

way  in  which    our  Indian    Empire    was 

built    up.     The    story  Is   told  in  simplo 

language,  without  any  striving  after  effect, 


f 


and  the  main  facta  are  brought  Into  proper 
roliuf,  and  not  buried  under  a  mass   of 
detail."— P(t/<  Mall  Gazette. 
' '  Deaerving  of  perusal  by  every  E  uropean 
„     „  ,     ^    -         „  ,     ,   iwluAiA."— Allahabad  Morning  Post. 

5.  The  Story  of  Our  Colonies.  By  H.  R 

Fox  Bourne.    With  six  Maps.    (4s.  6d.;  gilt  edges,  5s.) 

"  Boys— and  their  elders  too,  for  that 


"It  is  a  marvellous   stoi 
enterprise,  clearly,  accurate!, 
eantly  told."—  Weekly  Ditpateh. 


rv   of  British 
ely,  and  plea- 


matter— will  be  as  interested  in  this  true 
story  as  In  fiction."- Bro/^ord  Observer. 


Imperial  16mo.,  bevelled  boards,  price  3s.  each ;  gilt  edges,  3s.  6d.  each. 

WITH  20  ILLUSTRATIONS,  INOLCOINO   A   PORTRAIT  OF  KEBLE. 

1.  The   Christian  Year.     With    Bio- 

graphical Sketch  of  John  Keble,  together  with  some  Remarks 
upon  the  Influence  of  "The  Christian  Year,"  by  Alex.  H. 
Grant,  M.A.,  Author  of  "  The  Church  Seasons,"  etc. 

"This  pretty  edition  is  enriched  with  a  biographical  sketch  of  Keble,  and  is  full  of 
information  of  a  new  and  Interesting  character.'— /Swrrgy  Comet. 

WITH  32  ILLUSTRATIONS  BY  WILLIAM  MULREADY,  B.A.,  AND  PORTRAIT  OF  OOLDSHITB. 

2.  The  Vicar  of  Wakefield.    With  a  Bio- 

graphical  Sketch  of  Oliver  Goldsmith,  by  Henry  J.  Nicoll, 
Author  of  "  Landmarks  of  English  Literature,"  etc. 

"  What  could  be  better,  as  a  gift,  than  Goldsmith's  '  Vicar  of  Wakefield,'  beautuully 
printed  and  bound,  and  with  Mulready's  Illustrations  T'—Seottman. 

(8)       London :  John  Hogg,  13,  Paternoster  Row,  E.O. 


rice  Gs. 

and 

EXANDUK 

rne,"etc. 

idtmt  of  Do 
Echo. 

irlll  nnw  1)c 
life  of  De 


'  Alan 

.  A  New 
7.  Burton. 

3  Up- 

ice's,"  etc. 
.  Burton, 
as  more. "— 

s.     A 

.shore  and 
d  cheaper 
[.  Friaton. 


His- 

me.    By 

)trations. 


[nto  proper 
a  mass   ui 

Etiropein 
"ost. 

H.  K 


for  that 
this  truo 
server. 

.  each. 

Bio- 

emarks 
iiEX.  H. 

.  is  full  of 

BHITH. 

Bio- 

TiCOLL, 

lautitully 


Uniform  with  "Thk  Badminton  LiuiiAitY. ' 

Large  crown  8vo.,  472  pages,  cloth,  with  Portraits,  etc.,  price  lOs.  6d 

A  limited  number  o/lanjepaper  coineM,ito.,hal/-morocco,ijilf  top,price  31.i  0(/, 

THE   WHIST  TABLE. 

A  TREASURY  OF  NOTES  ON  THE  ROYAL  GAME 

By  "CAVENDISH,"  C.   MOSSOP,  A.  C.  EWALD, 

CHARLES  HERVEY, 

AND    OTHER   DISTINGUISIIKD    PLAYERS. 


-•♦- 


TO  WHICH   IS   ADDED 


SOLO  WHIST  AND  ITS  RULES. 

A  New  and  Revised  Treatise  on   "Solo  Whist,"  containing  all  the  lafoHt 

Alterations,  Additions,  and  Iinprovements,  by  Mr.  Abraham  S.  Wilkh, 

the  Well-known  Recognised  Authority  on  the  (.Jaine. 

The  whole  Edited  by  "Portland." 


Fikld-Marshal  H.R.H.  the  Prince  of  Wales  and  His  Grace 
DuKK OF  Portland  have  each  accepted  a  copy  of  "The  Whist  Table." 

♦♦ 


THE 


"A  noble  volnmo,  which  will  no  doubt  bo 
a  perennial  sotirco  of  delight  to  the  devotees 
of  whiHt,  and  the  young  player's  boat  guide 
to  proficiency.  It  proclaiiaa  its  authority 
In  high  style.  .  .  .  There  is  also  a  learned 
treatise  ou  Solo  Whist  by  Mr.  A.  S.  Wilks. 
The  binding  of  the  book  is  quite  a  picture." 
—  World. 

"A  coinprehenHivo  cyclopredia  of  the 
game,  its  laws,  history,  associations,  and 
gossip,  comi)iled  by  a  variety  of  eminent 
and  competent  hands. "— 2'iwM. 

"A  book  that  should  be  on  every  club- 
table  where  Whist  is  played."--SwncZay 
I'imes, 

"There  is  not,  to  our  knowledge,  any 
book  in  tho  language  which  brings  to- 
gether so  much  varied  and  interesting 
matter  on  tho  game  of  whist.  One  section 
which  deserves  special  mention  is  that 
which  Mr.  Abraham  S.  Wilks  devotes  to 
Solo  Whist.  Altogether,  the  volume  is  one 
which  will  come  as  a  treat  to  all  whist 
players." — Glasgow  Herald. 

"Most  interesting  and  practical."  — 
Punch. 


"A  wide  field  is  covered  by  *  Portland,' 
iind  his  brilliant  band  of  holi>crfl."— iVoni- 
infi  Lradcr. 

"  A.s  good  a  book  on  the  subject  of  Whist 
as  is  tit  bo  found.  ...  It  is  soinid,  whole- 
8oiMe  food,  and  it  is  so  administered  that 
it  can  bo  easily  .assimilated.  Uulos,  roa.son- 
ing,  illustrations  by  anecdote,  suggestions 
as  to  the  ethics  and  manners  of  the  game, 
are  happily  mingled  togetlier."  —  Wi»t- 
miuftcr  Gazette. 

"  Any  one  who  knows  Whist  must  pri7,c 
the  book  highly,  and  everyone  who  thinks 
he  knows  tlio  game  ought  to  be  compelled 
by  law  to  keep  quiet  about  it  until  ho  is 
qualified  to  pass  an  exarainatiou  in  the 
matter  of  tho  book." — Scotsman. 

"The  most  important  compilation  that 
has  yot  appeared  of  everything  relating  to 
our  most  popular  indoor  game." — Indian 
Daili/  Neirs. 

"  Mr.  Wilks  has  now  laid  down  tho  law 
on  Solo  Whist." — Detroit  Free  Press, 

"Caters  for  every  class  of  players. 
Amongst  its  contributors  are  all  the  elect 
of  the  green  cloth  tables." — DuKy  Teh  graph. 


HOURS    IN    MY  GARDEN:    and  other 

Nature  Sketches.  By  A.  H.  Japp,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.E.,  Author  of 
"  Life  of  De  Quincey,"  etc.  With  138  Hlustrations  by  W.  H.  J. 
Boot,  A.  W.  Cooper,  and  others.  In  large  crown  8vo.,  344  pages, 
cloth,  bevelled  boards,  price  6s. ;  gilt  edges,  Gs.  Gd. 

"  A  book  that  would  have  made  Par.son 
Wliite,  of  Selborne,  sit  up  all  night. 
Every  page  is  poetry  and  sutjgestiveness. " 
— Liverpool  Mercury. 


"There  is  a  very  genuine  love  of  rural 
nature  and  a  happy  touch  in  describing  its 
aspects  and  its  living  manifestations." — 
Times. 


London :  John  Hogg,  13,  Paternoster  Bow,  RO. 


(») 


m 


!  I 


f  i  i 


Sixth  Thousand.     Fcap.  8vo.,  boards,  price  la. 

Depression:  What  it  is,  and  how  to 

Cure  it.  By  A.  E.  Bridger,  B.  A.,  M.D.,  B.Sc,  F.R.C.P.E.,  Late 
Physician  to  the  Hospital  for  Diseases  of  the  Chest.  Author  of 
"  Man  and  his  Maladies,"  "  The  Treatment  of  Oonsumption,"  etc. 

"  Doserves  to  be  studied  for  ita  frank,  healthy,  itnd  helpful  advice."— S/i#eirf  Inde- 
pendent.  .  _  ^ 

■  — ii!rr^ir!Ziii77T!r — ~ — —  "m , r_r— ii — i — l' 

POPULAR  LEGAL  HANDBOOKS  by  ALMARIC  RUMSEY, 

Barrister  at-Law,    Professor    of    Indian    Jurisprudence  at   King's    College. 

Fcap.  8vo.,  strongly  bound,  price  Is.  each.     Jievised  to  dale. 

1.— Will-Making  Made  Safe  and  Easy, 

An  Aid  to  Testators,  Gentle  and  Simple,  Male  and  Femait, 
Married  and  Single,  Infant  and  Adult,  Civil  and  Military,  on  Land 
and  at  Sea,  at  Home  and  Abroad  ;  with  a  Great  Variety  of  Forms 
and  Rules  of  Descent  of  Real  and  Personal  Property  on  Intestacy 


"  We  can  commend  it  both  to  those  who 
have  no  legal  adviser  at  hand,  and  to  the 
country  practitioner  liimself." — Lato  Maga- 
zint  and  Review.  [  —Law  Journal. 

"  His  directions  are  clear,  his  law  sound." 
"J!ay  be  the  means  of  saving  many  a 
man  from  leaving  that  doubtful  legacy — 
a  lawsuit." — Literary  World. 


"  It  seems  to  be  the  best  of  all  books  of 
its  kind." — Athenaeum. 

"For  clergymen,  too,  who  are  often 
called  upon  suddenly  to  make  the  wills  of 
poor  parishioners,  it  will  be  very  helpful. 
It  is  remarkably  concise  and  clear  in  itb 
J  inguage  and  practical  in  its  suggestions." 
— Guardian. 


2.--The  Way  to  Prove  a  Will  and  to 

take  out  Administration.  Containing  Full  Instructions  Where, 
How,  and  When  to  Apply  ;  with  Alphabetical  Tables,  Forms  of 
Oaths,  Bonds,  etc.  ;  Rules  for  Personal  Applications  ;  and  other 
Information  required  for  obtaining  Probate  or  Administration. 

"Contains  much  useful  information  arranged  with  a  careful  regard  for  readinesf  of  ac- 
cess.   A  special  feature  ia  the  forms,  to  which  much  labour  has  been  devoted. " — Law  Times. 

"Such  a  capital  condensation  of  the  law  and  practice,  that  no  doubt  many  solicitors 
will  find  it  remarkably  handy  for  reference." — BHslol  Mercury. 

"  Executors  and  next-of-kin  will  find  it  a  useful  hook."— Literary  World. 

WITH  STOTHABD'a   ILLUSTRATIONS,  ENGRAVED  BY  HKATH. 

Demy  8vo.,  richly  bound,  cloth,  gilt  edges,  7s.  6d.  ;  half  calf  extra,  128.  6d. 

The  Life  and  A  dventures  of  Robinson 

Crusoe,  with  a  Sketch  of  Defoe,  by  Henry  J.  Nicoll. 
Note. — A  complete,  unabridged  edition  of  Defoe's  masterpiece,  with  all  the  22 
beautiful  Illustrations  by  Thomas  Stothard,  R.A.,  engraved  by  Charles 
Heath.    These  are  now  printed  from  the  Original  Copper  Plates,  which 
are  still  in  perfect  condition,  having  been  steel-faced  to  preserve  them. 
"  Mr.  HogK  is  to  be  thanke  1  for  re-issuing  the  '  Life  and  Adventures  of  Robinson  Crusoe 
withStothard's  twenty-two  designs  engraved  on  copper  by  Charles  Heath.    Their  charm  is 
Irresistible,  and  as  book  prints  they  rank  among  the  classics  of  English  art.    They  are 
delightful  works.    The  text  before  us  is  complete,  and  well  printed  in  a  clear  type.    This 
edition  18,  therefore,  excellent"— Athena!um. 


HINTS  FOR  THE  SELECTION  OF  CHRISTIAN  NAMES. 
Second  edition,  176  pp.,  cloth,  price  Is.  6d. 

The    Pocket    Dictionary    of   One 

Thousand  Christian  Names  (Masculine  and  Feminine) ;  with 

their  Meanings  Explained  and  Arranged  in  Four  Different  Ways. 

iW  Every  Parent  ahovld  comult  this  hefore  deciding  on  a  Child's  Name. 

"This  will  be  a  useful  and  interesting  book  for  those  who  like  to  learn  the  meaning  of 
their  own  and  their  friends*  appellations.  Parents  should  purchase  it,  as  it  might  help  them 
to  name  their  children  a  little  more  originally  than  they  do."— Glasgow  Herald. 

(10)       London  :  John  Hogg,  13,  Paternoster  Bow^E^. 


POPULA«    COOKERY    BOOKS. 


Med 


Hum  16mo.,  128  pages,  boards,  la.,  printed  in  brown  ink. 

1.  What  shall  we  have  for  Breakfast? 

or,  Everybody's  Breakfast  Book.  Containing  over  175  Recipes. 
By  Agnes  C.  Maitland,  Author  of  "  The  Afternoon  Tea-Book." 

"An  epicure,  or  rather  a  glutton,  might  after  reading  Miss  Maitland's  book  answer  her 
title  question  by  sajing,  'Everything  you  Lave  got  here,  please.'  It  is  a  worthy  little 
book..'  — Manchester  Guardian, 

Dedicated  to  H.R.H.  the  Duchess  of  ALBANY. 
Second  Edition.     Eleventh  Thousand.     Medium  16n)0.,  price  Is. 

2.  The  Afternoon  Tea  Book.     How 

to  make  Tea,  Coffee,  Chocolate,  Cakes,-  Scones,  Rolls,  Sandwiches, 
Cooling  Drinks,  and  Ices.     By  Agnks  C.  Maitland. 

"A  most  useful  little  manual." — Glasgow  Herald. 

Crown  8vo.,  160  pages,  price  Is.,  strongly  bound  in  linen  cloth. 

3.  The  Cookery   Primer   for   School 

and  Home  Use.  By  Aqnks  C.  Maitland. 
The  Book  contains  One  Hundred  and  Twenty-five  Becipes  for  very  Cheap 
Wholesome  Dishes,  Hints  for  Hard  Times,  Rcmiirks  about  tht;  Higlit  Kinds  of  Food,  Prices 
of  Various  Foods,  Specimen  Breakfasts,  How  to  Sjiend  the  Money  and  do  the  Cooking, 
About  Cooking  Pans  and  Tins,  Best  Ways  of  Cooking  Meat,  llow  to  Cook  Fish,  Invalid 
Cookery,  etc.  Tlie  Cookery  Primer  will  be  found  very  usefulju  Elementary  Schools,  as 
well  as  in  Cottage  Homes. 

Eleventh  edition,  crown  8vo.,  302  pp.,  cloth,  price  3s.  6d. 

4.  Dainty  Dishes.    Receipts  collected 

by  Lady  Harriet  St.  Clair  (late  Countess  Mimster), 

"  A  design  so  excellent,  and  un  aciomplishment  so  complete,  may  well  recommend  this 
volume  to  the  consideration  of  the  ladies  of  this  kingdom.  If  economy  can  be  combined 
with  an  agreeable  and  nutritious  diet,  by  all  means  let  the  fact  be  well  known." — BHtish 
Hail. 

"  It  is  something  to  say  in  this  age  of  many  cookery-books,  that  the  recipes  given  are  not 
fanciful,  but  practical.  They  can  really  be  cooked,  a  recommendation  that  cannot  be 
given  to  many  of  our  cookery-books." — Glasgow  Herald. 

5.  Dainty  Dishes.    Cheap  Edition.  SeejKigei. 

Second  Edition,  Tenth  Thousand,  crown  8vo.,  176  pp.,  linen  cloth,  price  Is. 

6.  Toothsome   Dishes  :    Fish,  Flesh, 

and  Fowl ;  Soups,  Sauces,  and  Sweets.  Nearly  One  Thousand 
Recipes,  with  Household  Hints  and  other  Useful  Information. 
Edited  by  Carrie  Davenport. 

"Just  the  work  for  a  domestic  manager  to  consult  and  esteem."— Daiiy  Telegraph. 
"The  recipes  arc  plain  and  good." — Saturday  Review. 

Crown  8vo.,  128  pages,  boards,  price  Is. 

7.  TheHousewife'sHandy-book.  Three 

Hundred  and  Fifty  Useful  E very-day   Recipes.     By   C.   J.    S. 
Thompson,  Author  of  "  The  Best  Thing  to  Do,"  etc. 

"  An  exceedingly  useful  supplement  to  an  ordinary  cookery  or  household  book.  . 
Another  class  of  recipes  is  for  Toilet  preparations'"— 6'/i':/''c7(^  Lidcpcukii.t. 

8.  Drinks  of  all  Kinds,  Hot  and  Cold, 

for  all  Seasons  (hidudmg  Temperance  and  lie. ^t  oral  ice  Driulcs),    By 
Fhedhkick  and  Skymouu  Daviks.     Fcap.  8vo.,  \b'l  pp.,  pricu  Is. 

"  This  is  ti  capital  little  manual,  containing  numerous  recipes  for  the  best  summer  and 
inter  drinks,  both  British  and  foreign."— S/kjIu.;-/  In'ki)endent. 


"Wl 


London :  Jolm  Hogg,  13,  Paternoster  Bow,  E.O.       (11) 


ih 


>  •; 


1 1  ' 


hi 


ILLUSTRATED  NATURAL  HISTORY  BOOKS, 

INCULCATING  KINDNESS  TO  ANIMALS. 


WITH  UPWARDS  OF  300  ENGBA VINOS  BT  BEWICK  AND  OTHEBS. 

FIFTH  AND   CHEAP    EDITION. 

Large  crown  8vo.,  520  pp.,  cloth,  price  3b.  6d.  ;  gilt  edges,  48. 

1.  The  Parlour  Menagerie:  Wherein  are  ex- 
hibited, In  a  Descriptive  and  Anecdotical  form,  the  Habits, 
Resources,  and  Mysterious  Instincts  of  the  more  Interesting 
Portions  of  the  Animal  Creation.  Dedicated  by  permission 
to  the  Bight  Hon.  the  Baroness  Burdett-Goutts  (President) 
and  the  Members  of  the  Ladies'  Committee  of  the  Royal  Society 
for  the  Prevention  of  Cruelty  to  Animals. 


MB.  MORWOODS  NATURAL  HISTORY  BOOKS. 

From  the  Royal  Society  for  the  Prevention  of  Cruelty  to  Animals. 

"I  am  directed  by  the  Literature  Committee  to  inform  you  tliat  Mr.  Morwood's  books 
('  Facts  and  Ptiases  of  Animal  Life '  and  '  Wonderful  Animals ')  are  calculated  greatly  to  pro- 
mote the  objects  of  this  Society,  and,  therefore,  it  is  our  earnest  hope  that  they  will  be 
purchased  by  all  lovers  of  animals  for  circulation  among  young  persona,  and  in  public 
institutions.— John  Colam,  Secretary." 

WI^H  BEVENTY-FIVK  WOOD  KNQKAVING8. 

Second  Edition,  small  crown  8vo.,  288  pp.,  cloth,  prico  28  6d. ;  gilt  edges,  38. 

2.  Facts  and  Phases  of  Animai  Life,  and 

the  Claims  of  Animals  to  Humane  Treatment.  With  Original 
and  Amusing  Anecdotes.  By  Vernon  S.Morwood,  late  Lecturer 
to  tli;^  Royal  Society  for  the  Prevention  of  Cruelty  to  Animals. 

WITH  BIGHTT-ONK  ILLUSTRATIONS, 

Second  Edition,  small  crown  8vo.,  288  pp.,  cloth,  price  2s.  6d. ;  gilt  edges,  Ss. 

3.  Wonderful  Animals:  Working,  Domes- 

tic, and  Wild.  Their  Structure,  Habits,  Homes,  and  Uses — De- 
scriptive, Anecdotical,  and  Amusing.  By  Vernon  S.  Morw^ood. 

Dtdicated  by  permission  to  the  Royal  Society/or  the  Prevention  qf  Cruelty  to  Aritnals, 
SECOND   EDITION,    WITH   FIFTY-NINE  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

128pp.,  small  crown  8vo.,  boards,  price  Is.  ;  or  bound  in  cloth,  Is.  (id. 

4.  Tne  Band  of  Mercy  Guide  to  Nrtural 

History.  An  Elementary  Book  on  Zoology :  I.  ;« tive, 
Amusing,  and  Anec  lotical.    Bj'  Vernon  S.  Morwoox;  . 

WITH    THIRTY    ILLl'STRATIONS. 

Attractively  bound  in  the  New  and   Effective  Chromatic  Style    (Four 
Colours  and  Gold).     Crown  8vo.,  192  pp.,  cloth,  price  Is.  6d. 

5.  An  Easy  Guide  to  Scripture  Animals. 

Being  a  Description  of  all  the  Animals  mentioned  in  the  Bible, 
with  the  Scripture  References,  Numerous  Anecdotes,  etc.  For 
Home  Use  and  for  Day  and  Sunday  Schools.    By  Vernon  S. 

MORWOOD. 


*•  Mr.  Hogg  is,  without  question,  a  specialist  in  the  art  of  catering  for  the 
literary  tastes  of  the  young." — Shropshire  Guardian. 


(12)      London:  John  Hogg,  13,  Paternoster  Bow,  E.O. 


SPECIMEN   ILLUSTRATION 

From  Natural  History  Books. 


(13) 


Pii    '^ 


MR.   ASGOU  R.  HOPE'S  BOOKS. 

"  Mr.  Aflcott  R.  Hope  now  occupies  the  foreraoRt  place  as  a  writer  of  fiction  for  the 
Hchoolboy,  and  as  he  never  produces  a  weak  book,  and  never  disappoints  his  clients,  his 
name  is  always  a  bufficient  passport." — School  Board  Chronicle. 

"  The  friend  of  all  British  hoy  a."— Manchester  Examiner. 

"  As  a  writer  of  boys'  books,  Mr.  Hope  has  discovered  a  vein  for  himself  which  he  has 
worked  with  perseverance  and  success."— ^6erde«n  Journal. 


WITH   EIGHT    ILLUSiUATIONS. 

Third  edition,  crown  8vo.,  384  pp.,  cloth,  price  3s.  6d.  ;  gilt  edges,  4s. 

1.  Stories  of  Young  Adventurers. 

WITH    EIGHT  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Small  crown  Svo.,  384  pp.,  cloth,  price  Ss.  6d.  ;  gilt  edges,  48. 

2.  A  Book  of  Boyhoods. 

WITH    EIGHT   ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Small  crown  8vo.,  352  pp.,  cloth,  price  3s.  6d.  ;  gilt  edges,  48. 

3.  Our  Home-made  Stories. 

WITH   NINETEEN   ILLUSTRATIONS  BY   GORDON   BROWirE. 

Small  crown  8vo.,  352  pp.,  cloth,  price  3s.  6d. ;  gilt  edges,  4s. 

4.  Evenings  away  from  Home. 

A  Modem  Miscellany  of  Entertainment  for  Young  Masters  and 
Misses. 

WITH   EIGHT  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Small  crown  8vo.,  352  pp.,  cloth,  price  3s.  6d . ;  gilt  edges,  4s. 

6.  Stories  out  of  School-time. 

WITH   EIGHT   ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Small  crown  8vo.,  384  pp.,  cloth,  price  3s.  6d. ;  gilt  edges.  4s. 

6.  1?  oung  Days  of  Authors. 

WITH   TWELVE   ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Crown  8vo.,  384  pp.,  cloth,  price  3s.  6d.  ;  gilt  edges,  48. 

7.  Romance  of  the  Mountains. 

WITH   TWELVE   ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Crown  8vo.,  352  pp.,  cloth,  price  Ss.  6d. ;  gilt  edges,  4s. 

8.  Romance  of  the  Forests. 

WITH   TWELVE    ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Crovyn  8vo.,  352  pp.,  cloth,  3s.  6d.  ;  gilt  edges,  48. 

9.  Redskin  and  Paleface :  Romance  and 

Adventure  of  the  Plains. 

"There  are  no  books  for  boys  that  can  compare  with  Ascott  R.  Hope's  in  gonuiue 
pleasure  and  instruction."— ire«/'iy  Dispatch. 


v_,  \^  \^  v^  \,y  \^  \^  \^"^_/  \-/  "w    s^  N*  V.      «^  s..-"  ^-^  X^'X'*^''  \_'"^''v^\ 


■"X-^"^^  V'    v-^--/''  .     ^ 


"A  series  of  excellent  books  for  boys  is  pvhlishedby  Mr.  John  Hogg, 
London." — Scotsman. 

(14)      London:  John  Hogg,  13,  Paternoster  Row,  RC. 


THE  GOVERNOR   LOSKS   HIS   TKMl'liK. 


SPECIMEN    ILLUSTRATION 

From  ''  MaUheio  FlimkrH"  [Zs.  Qil.  Booh). 


(n) 


WITH  EIGHT  ILLUOTRATIONS. 

Seventh  Edition,  crown  8vo.,  384  pp.,  cloth,  price  38.  6d. ;  gilt  edges,  48. 

The  Secret  of  Success ;  or.  How  to 

Get  on  in  the  World.  With  some  Remarks  upon  True  and 
False  Success,  and  the  Art  of  making  the  Best  Use  of  Life. 
Interspersed  with  Numerous  Examples  and  Anecdotes.  By 
W.  H.  Davenport  Adams,  Author  of  "Plain  Living  and  High 

Thinking,"  etc. 

"  Mr.  Adams's  work  Is  In  some  respects  more  practical  than  Mr.  Smiles's.  He  takes  the 
illustrations  more  from  the  world  of  business  and  commerce,  and  their  application  is  un- 
mistakable."— Aberdeen  Journal. 

"There  is  a  healthy,  honest  ring  in  its  advice,  and  a  wise  discrimination  between  true 

and  false  success Many  a  story  of  success  and  failure  helps  to  point  its  moral. 

— Bradford  Observer. 

"The  field  which  Mr.  Adams  traverses  is  so  rich,  extensive,  and  interesting^  that  his 
book  is  calculated  to  impart  much  sound  moral  philosophy  of  a  kind  and  in  a  form  that 

will  be  appreciated  by  a  large  number  of  readers The  boc't  is  otherwise  a  miue 

of  anecdote  relating  to  men  who  have  not  only  got  on  in  the  world,  but  whose  names  are 
illustrious  as  benefactors  to  their  kind." — Dundee  Advertiser, 


[\ 


H:d 


I 


■I  )i 


i 


I  M 


WITH  TWO  COLOURED  PLATES  AND  EIGHT  PAGE  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Fifth  edition,  crown  8vo.,  432  pp.,  cloth,  price  38.  6d. ;  gilt  edges,  4b. 

Our  Redcoats  and  Bluejackets:  War 

Pictures  on  Land  and  Sea.  Forming  a  Continuous  Narrative 
of  the  Naval  and  Military  History  of  England  from  the  year 
1793  to  the  Present  Time,  including  the  War  in  Egypt  and  in  the 
Soudan.  Interspersed  with  Anecdotes  and  Accounts  of  Personal 
Service.  By  Henry  Stewart,  Author  of  "  The  Ocean 
Ware,"  etc.  With  a  Chronological  List  of  England's  Naval 
and  Military  Engagements. 
"  A  capital  collection  of  graphic  sketches  of  plucky  and  brilliant  achievements  afloat  and 

ashore,  and  has,  moreover,  the  advantage  of  being  a  succinct  narrative  of  historical  events. 

It  is,  in  fact,  the  naval  and  military  history  of  England  told  in  a  series  of  effective  tableaux." 

—World. 
"  It  is  not  a  mere  collection  of  scraps  and  anecdotes  about  our  soldiers  and  sailors,  but  a 

history  of  their  principal  achievements  since  the  beginning  of  the  war  in  1793.    The  book  has 

charms  for  others  than  l&dB."— Scotsman. 
"  Possesses  such  a  g'^nuine  interest  as  no  work  of  fiction  could  surpass."— /16erd«enJo«rna/. 

WITH   EIGHT   ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Martyrs  to  Freedom ;   or.  Struggles 

for  National  Liberty.    A  Book  for  Old  and  Young.    By  the 
Rev.  Philip  Barnes.    Crown  8vo.,  3s.  6d.  ;  gilt  edges,  4s. 

"  P.irents  and  teachera  who  desire  to  bring  up  the  boys  of  to-day  on  ncble  lines  will  put 
this  book  into  their  hands."- PH'>;i.s7/cj-«'  Ctrndar,  [Post. 

"  Its  stirring  incidents,  as  well  as  its  historical  value,  make  it  acceptable." — Morning 
"There  is  not  a  dull  page  in  the  lives  of  such  heroes  as  these."— Bradford  Observer. 
"  Will  win  the  interest  and  admiration  of  everybody."— C/tristian  World. 
"  Should  bo  read  by  every  boy  and  girl  in  the  empire." — Weekly  Dispatch. 


The  Parlour  Menagerie.  ^s.6d.  SeepageU, 

"  Among  the  multitude  of  publishers  who  issue  books  suitable  for  presents, 
Mr.  Hogg  holds  a  high  place.  A  catalogue  of  his  publications,  samples  of 
which  lie  be/ore  us,  contains  a  number  of  iiseful  and  interesting  works 
eminently  suitable  for  presentation  to  young  people  of  both  sexes,  and  they 
contain  as  much  reading  at  as  low  a  price  as  any  books  in  the  market. " — Pall 
Mall  Gazette. 

(16)       London :  John  Hogg,  13,  Paternoster  Bow,  EO. 


I 


I  Journal, 


Fourth  and  Cheap  Edition,  mth  Twelve  Portraita. 
Crown  8vo.,  472  pp.,  cloth,  price  3a.  6d. ;  gilt  edges,  4b. 

Landmarks    of    English    Literature. 

By  Henry  J.  Nicoll,  Author  of  "Great  Movements,"  etc. 

"  Mr.  NicoU's  book  has  many  comp>  .titors  to  contend  with,  but  will  be  found  to  hold  its 
own  with  the  best  of  them."— S<.  James's  Gazette. 

"  Mr.  NicoU's  facts  are  commendably  accurate,  and  his  style  is  perfectly  devoid  of  pre- 
tentiousness, tawdriness,  and  mannerism."— .Sahtrrirtv  Review. 

"  Mr.  NicoU's  well-arranged  volume  will  be  of  service  to  the  student  and  interesting  to  the 
general  reader.  The  volume  deserves  praise  for  simplicity  of  purpose,  as  well  as  for  careful 
workmanship."- Spectator. 


Second  and  Cheap  Edition. 
WITH  BIGHT  PORTRAITS,  464  pp.,  crown  8vo.,  cloth,  price  3s.  8d.  ;  gilt  edges,  48. 

Great    Movements,  and    tliose    who 

Achieved  Them.    By  Henry  J.  Nicoll,  Author  of    "  Land- 
marks of  English  Literature,"  etc. 

"  A  useful  book.  Such  work  should  always  find  its  reward  in  an  age  too  busy  or  too  care- 
less to  search  out  for  itself  the  sources  of  the  great  streams  of  modern  civilization."— 2'i7n«.f. 

"Immense  benefit  might  be  done  by  adopting  it  as  a  prize  book  for  young  people  in  the 
upper  classes  of  most  sorts  of  schools."— ScTioot  Board  Chronicle. 

Second  edition,  small  crown  8vo.,  384  pp.,  cloth,  price  3b.  6d. ;  gilt  edges,  4s. 

A    Popular  Technical  Dictionary  of 

Commercial    and    General    Information.      By    Edward    T. 
Blakely,  F.S.A.  (of  the  Board  of  Trade). 


"It  should  certainlv  find  a  place  in  com- 
mercial schools  as  well  as  upon  merchants' 
tables."— Bristot  Mercury. 


"  A  valuable  addition  to  our  works  of  in- 
struction, as  well  as  to  commercial  litera- 
ture."—Britis/i  Journal  oj  Commerce. 


Footsteps  to  Fame  :  A  Book  to  Open  other 

Books.  By  J.  Hain  Friswell,  Author  of  "Out  and  About," 
"  The  Gentle  Life,"  etc.  A  New  and  Revised  Edition,  with  Seven 
Illustrations.  Crown  8vo.,  320  pp.,  cloth,  price  3s.  6d. ;  gilt  edges,  4s. 

"  An  ideal  boy's  hools.."— Belfast  News  Letter. 
"An  admirable  volume  to  place  in  the    [      "A  pleasantly  written  volume.     Would 
hands  of  young  ptople."— Glasgow  Herald.  make  a  good  present."— Brttts/i  Weekly. 


Dainty  Dishes.    3^.  6d.    Seepage  ii. 
Manuals  of  Self-Culture  for  Young 

Men  and  Women. 

1.  The  Secret  of  Success.    See  page  16. 

2.  Plain  Living  and  High  Thinking.    See  page  21. 
8.  Woman's  work  ana  Worth.   See  page  7. 

4.  Hood's  Guide  to  English  Versification.   See  page  2(5. 

5.  Landmarks  of  English  Literature.   See  page  17. 

6.  Blakely's  Technical  Dictionary.   Seepage  17. 

7.  Self-Help  for  Women.    See  page  7. 

' '  JOHN  HOQG  on  the  title-page  of  a  publication  is  always  a  guarantee  that  it 
is  wholesome  andinstmctive  as  welt  as  entertaining,  and  may  be  eagerly  welcomed  into 
the  most  fastidious  home.  Mr.  Hogg  prints  nothing  hut  works  of  a  high  order,  whose 
influence  for  good  is  as  evident  as  their  artistic  get-up,  and  whose  price  is  as  low 
as  their  interest  is  deep  and  healthf^iV—OhvnXTS  Chronicle. 


London :  John  Hogg,  13,  Paternoster  Bow,  E.G. 


(17) 


<      5 


I 


t  i 


WITH    TWFLVE   PORTRAITS. 

Crown  8vo.,  352  pp.,  cloth,  38.  6d. ;  gilt  edges,  48. 

Some  Historic  Women ;  or,  Biographical 

Studies  of  Women  who  have  made  History.    By  W.  H.  Daven- 
port Adams,  Author  of  "  Woman's  Work  and  Worth,"  etc. 

"  The  sketclies  are  cliarminftly  written."— liookHller. 

WITH   EIGHT   1LLU8TBATI0N8. 

Small  crown  8vo.,  384  pp.,  cloth,  price  3b.  6d.  ;  gilt  edges,  48. 

A  Few  Good  Women,  and  what  they 

Teach  Us.  A  Book  tor  Girls.  By  CatherineMaryMacSorley, 
Author  of  "  May  Lane,"  "  His  Chosen  Work,"  etc. 

"  It  would  be  well  for  the  girlliood  of  England  if  such  books  as  this  were  more  road  by 
the  gir^B."— Methodist  il'orld. 
*'  A  nice  gift-book  for  thoughtful  girlH." — Orophie. 


WITH  EIGHT  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Fourth  Edition,  Crown  Svo.,  384  pp.,  cloth,  price  3s.  6d. 


gilt  edges,  4s. 


Exemplary    Women:     A    Record    of 

Feminine  Virtues  and  Achievements  (abridged  from  "  Woman 'f 
Work  and  Worth  ").    By  W.  H.  Davenport  Adams. 

"The  qualiflcations  and  influence  of  women  indifferent  spheres  of  life  are  detailed  and 
Illustrated  by  notices  of  the  lives  of  many  who  have  been  distinguished  in  various  positions. " 
—Bazaar. 


Second  Edition,  with  Eight  Engravings  after  Celebrated  Painters. 
Small  crown  8vo.,  392  pp.,  cloth,  price  3s.  6d.  ;  gilt  edges,  4s. 

The  Church  Seasons.       Historically 

and  Poetically  Illustrated.    By  Alexander  H.  Grant,  M.A., 

Author  of  "  Half-Hours  with  our  Sacred  Poets,"  etc. 

"  Mr.  Grant's  scholarship  is  endorsed  by  authorities;  his  method  is  good,  his  style  clear, 
and  his  treatment  so  impartial  that  his  work  has  been  praised  alike  by  Church  I'ivien,  Record, 
IVatchman,  Freeman,  and  Nonconformint.  No  words  of  ours  could  better  prove  the  catho- 
licity of  a  most  instructive  and  valuable  vfork."— Peterborough  Advertii^er. 


ILLUSTRATED  BY  A.  B.  HOUGHTON  AND  OTHERS. 
Crown  Svo.,  576  pp.,  cloth,   price  3s.   6d.  ;   gilt  edges,  4s. 

Royal  Children.     By  Julia  Luard.     a  New, 

Revised,  and  Cheaper  Edition,  with  8  full-page  Illustrations. 

"It  is  a  big  book,  but  there  is  not  a  dull,  disappointing  page  in  it."— Northern  Bail ii 
Telearavh. 

"  if  there  is  one  thing  young  people  like,  it  is  reading  about  youthful  kings  and  queens. 
—Spect'itor. 

"It  makes  history  an  interestini:  Btoiy."— Literary  fVorld. 

"  It  is  a  book  with  a  backbone."— i>r(7i»/i  and  Colonial  Printer  and  Stationer. 

"  The  youth  of  both  sexes  are  wider  deep  obligations  by  the  publication  of 
Mr,  Hogg^s  very  interesting  and  attractive  volumes.  It  is  a  great  object  to 
attract  the  young  to  the  habitual  practice  of  reading.  That  can  only  be  ac- 
complished by  putting  into  their  hands  books  which  will  interest  and  amuse 
them,  and  at  the  same  time  furnish  them  with  usefid  knowledge,  and  with 
sound  lessons  of  a  mx)ral,  judicious,  and  sensible  character,  calculated  to  be. 
useful  to  them  as  they  advance  in  ijears." — Dundee  Courier  and  Argus. 

(18)        London ;  John  Hogg,  13,  Paternoster  Bow,  £.0.  ;. 


WITH  ONE  HUNDRED  ILLUSTRATIONS  BY  OEORGE  THOMAS,   ' 
ENGRAVED  BY  VV.  H,  THOMAf. 

Large  crown  8vo.,  512  pp.,  cloth,  Hs.  Gd.  ;  gilt  edges,  4a. 

Uncle  Tom's  Cabin ;  or,  Life  among  the 

Lowly.  A  Tale  of  Slave  Life  in  America.  By  Harriet 
Beecher  Stowe.  With  a  Biographical  and  Critical  Sketoh 
of  the  Author  (accompanied  by  Vignette  Portrait  and  Auto- 
graph) by  Alex.  H.  Japp,  LL.D. 

t^  The  Illustrations  are  from  the  Original  Wood  Blocks  (now  in  possession  of 
the  Publisher)  which  were  preparcil  at  great  cost,  Mr.  George  Thomas  havii)g 
made  a  special  visit  to  America  so  ao  to  be  accurate  in  detail  and  local  colournig. 
They  were  originally  used  in  the  edition  published  by  Nathaniel  Cooko  {Illustrated 
London  Neioa  Office)  in  1853,  which  is  now  a  scarce  book. 


Largo  crown  8vo.,  402  pp.,  cloth,  price  Ss.  6d. ;  gilt  edges,  4o. 

The    Pilgrim's    Progress.      In    Two 

Parts.  By  John  Bunyan.  With  Bibliographical  Notes,  and 
a  Life  of  the  Author,  by  Robert  Southey  ;  Portrait  and  Auto- 
graph of  Bunyan,  and  Thirty  Wood  Engravings  by  W. 
Harvey,  from  the  Oiigiual  Blocks.    The  Text  in  large  type. 

"  An  excellent  edition  of  the  great  alle^orv.    It  containa  Southey's  '  Life,'  which  certainly 
stands  first  for  literary  merit."— J'ati  Mall  Gazette. 

"  Costliereditions  are  on  sale,  but  none  produced  with  more  taste  than  this  one."— i>i«»at(h. 

"A  real  service  has  been  rtndered  for  those  wlio  want  a  thoroughly  readable  copy  of  'The 
Pilgrim'a  i'rogXQsa.'"— Literary  World. 
y-  '  rhis  edition  has  exceptional  claims  upon  public  favour.  The  late  poet  laureate's 
biography  is  in  his  best  manner,  while  Harvey's  effective  woodcuts  are  in  themselves  a 
feature  of  very  considerable  interest  to  lovers  of  British  art.  In  the  matter  of  typography 
and  general  get-up  the  reprint  is  in  every  respect  superior  to  the  original  edition,  and  ttiu  luw 
price  at  whicii  tlie  book  is  published  should  tempt  many  to  obtain  a  copy."— Ox/brd  Tvmts. 


WITH  TWELVE  ILLU8TEATION8  BY   THOMAS  STOTHARD,  B.A., 
AND  A   PORTRAIT   OF   DEFOE. 

In  one  volume,  512  pp.,  large  crown  8vo.,  cloth,  price  38.  6d.  ;  gilt  edges,  la. 

Tiie  Life  and  Adventures  of  Robinson 

Crusoe,  of  York,  Mariner.     With  an  Account  of  his  Travels 
round  Three  P'arts  of  the  Globe. 
A  complete,  unahidged  Edition  of  both  Parts,  xoUk  no  curtailment  of  the 

"Further  Adventures." 

"It  has  every  fejvture  for  becoming  the  boy's  favourite  edition  of  'Robinson  Crusoe. '"- 
School  Board  Chronicle. 

"  This  handsome  volume  cannot  fail  to  command  an  extensive  sale ;  It  contains  both  parts 
of  the  immortal  hero's  -idvent  -ros,  and  is  therefore  properly  styled  a  'complete  edition.'  A 
portrait  and  brief  Alemoirof  i.  fnf  nrpcfides  his  t^lti."— Manchester  IVeckly  Post. 

"This  edition  of  'boyhood's  classic'  wIU  take  rank  among  the  best.  Every  boy  should 
read  '  Robinson  Crusoe,'  and  will  if  he  has  he  chance,  and  no  better  copy  could  be  provided 
than  the  one  published  by  Mr.  Hogg."— Jreii«i/an  Methodist  Sunday  School  Magazine. 


A   NEW   BOOK   FOR    BOYS.       WITH   TWELVE   ILLUSTRATIONS . 

Small  crown  8vo.,  334  pp.,  cloth,  price  Ss.  6d.  ;   gilt  edges,  4s. 

Master   Minds  in  Art,  Science,   and 

Letters.    A  Book  for  Boys.    By  W.  H.  Davenport  Adams, 
Author  of  "  The  Secret  of  Success,"  etc. 

"Skilfully  adapted  to  the  capacity  of  the  young  reader." — Saturday  Review. 

*•  Mr.  John  Hogg  is  always  successful  in  prodivcing  an  attractive  array  oj 
books  for  youthful  readers,  ....  and  toe  ought  to  add,  that  all  his 
puNications  are  prettily  got  tip." — Bristol  Mercury. 

London:  John  Hogg,  13,  Paternoster  Bow,  E.G.       (19) 


!^ 


I'l 


'  i 


WITH    BIOHT  ILLUBTRATIONB. 
Sucond  Edition,  crown  8vo.,  384  pp.,  oloth,  pricu  3b.  6(1.  ;  gilt  edgen,  4r. 

The  Ocean  Wave:  Narratives  of  some 

of  the  GreatoHt  VoyagoH,  Seamon,  DJHcoverioH,  8hipwre<ikH,  and 

MutinicH  of  the  World.      By  Henry   StewakTj  Author  of 

**  Our  Iledcoats  and  Bluejackets,"  etc. 

"  A  (UtllKlitful  voluinn  of  ndvonture.    Uobt'lllons  and  nmtlnleH  como  jostlln)?  up  aifainfit 

hairbruailtli  «H<-ai><;H  and  niniirnf\tl  diHaRturH ;  while  the  nnuth  neaH  and  Ihtt  north,  the  bMuatnr 

and  tlie  pohts,  are  all  l)rouKht  to  notice."— /iV(U<>''('>/tirf  Mercnr\i. 

"Ailik'ht -  - 

movement  (      .       ,  _  

sea'  to  the  iron  coast  of  Nova  /embla."— N/c/'/WW  I ndivi'ndfnt. 


ik'ht  tliroiik'h  the  air  on  tlie  enchanted  iirayer-cariu^t  winild  not  RuriiaRn  In  intercHt  t)ie 
lent  of  thcHe  narrativcH  from  'Hummcr  ittlefl  of  Kden  lyini;  in  dark  puriile  Biihurus  of 


WITH   EIGHT  ILLUHTUATIONH   BY    VHANK  ABRLL. 

Large  crown  8vo.,  422  pp.,  cloth,  price  3b.  6d. ;  gilt  cdgoB,  4s. 

The  Adventures  of  Maurice  Drum- 
more  (Royal  Marines),  by  Land  and  Sea.  By  Lin  don 
Meadows,  Author  of  "  Whittlings  from  the  West,"  "  College 
Recollections  and  Church  Experiences,"  etc. 

"  It  InalmoHt  equal  to  llobinson  Crusoe." 
—Shfjiild  Ind'iwndint. 
"  It  Is  thorouKhly  healthy,  not  'Koody '  in 


the  least ;  in  short,  junt  sucli  a  boolc  as  one 
would  wIhIi  to  i>lace  in  the  hiiuds  of  a  i)uro- 
min<led,  l'.i|{hB|>irited  hoy."  —  Nottiniiham 
Guardian. 


"We  are  inclined,  after  much  delibera- 
tion, to  call  it  tlio  best  book  for  boys  ever 
written."— (Vimtiau  Leader. 


"  It  would  bo  aj)ity  if  ttio  merits  of  such 
ho  cr( 

ICOLMli 

-Aberdeen  Dailu  Frre  Prens, 


ipitv  1 
a  story  were  lost  in  the  crowd, and  we  trust 
it  will  receive  the  recognition  which  is  its 
due." 


With  Frontispiece,  small  cr.  8vo.,  3.52  pp.,  cloth,  price  38.  6d. ;  gilt  edges,  48. 

The  Glass  of  Fashion:    A  Universal 

Handbook  of  Social  Etiquette  and  Home  Culture  for  Ladies 
and  Gentlemen.  With  Copious  and  Practical  Hints  upon  the 
Manners  and  Ceremonies  of  every  Relation  in  Life — at  Home, 
in  Society,  and  at  Court.  Interspersed  with  Numerous 
Anecdotes.    By  the  Lounger  in  Society. 

'•J 

"  ITseful,  sensibly  written,  and  full  of  amusing  illustrative  anecdotes. 


"  The  most  sensible  book  on  etiquette  that  we  remember  to  have  seen."— Pall  Mall  Gazette. 
"Creditable  to  the  good  sense  and  taste,  as  well  as  to  the  special  information  of  its  author. 


-Af oniinff  Post. 


—Teleuraiih. 


WITH   FIVB  WOODCUTS,  ILLUSTRATING    "  THB  HAND  OP  GOOD  FORTUNE,"  BTO. 

Fifth  Edition,  crown  8vo.,  304  pp.,  cloth,  price  38.  6d. 

Your  Luck's  in  Your  Hand ;  or.  The 

Science  of  Modern  Palmistry,  chiefly  according  to  the  Systems 
of  D'Arpentigny  and  Desbarrolles,  with  some  Account  of  the ; 
Gipsies.     By  A.  R.  Craig,  M.A.,  Author  of  "  The  Philosophy 
of  Training,"  etc. 

"  The  Rlove-makers  oufjht  to  present  the  author  with  a  service  of  gold  plate.  He  will  be  a  ■ 
rash  man  who  lets  anybody  see  his  bare  hands  after  this.  We  are  anxious  to  find  a  lost  pair  | 
of  gloves  before  we  ro  out  for  a  breath  of  fresh  air  after  such  an  exhausting  study  as  this  ; 
book  has  furnished  UB."—Sheitfield  and  Jiotherham  Independent.  ! 

"Palmistry,  chiromancy,  and  their  kindred  studies  may  be  mystical  indeed,  but  neTer] 
unworthy.  There  is  more  in  them  than  the  mass  imagine,  and  to  those  who  care  to  wade  into 
them,  Mr.  Craig  will  prove  himself  a  capital  guide."— Manclu.iter  Weekly  Post. 

'Miives  the  fullest  rules  for  interpreting  trie  lines  and  marks  on  the  hands,  fingers,  and 
wrists,  as  well  as  the  points  of  character  indicated  by  their  ahave."— Bookseller. 


-N      A    ->   ->  '^ 


'-N  ^-V'*N-'^     ^    "v      ^   ' 


•^  -^     ^   -  ~\   ■  X  '^  ^^  ^>  --\    '^   •  ^  'X.  '"X  r^  /"\    -A   '"\  r>   '~\   ■ 


^■\  ^-\  '"\  .-"v  ^\  ' 


•'  As  in  every  book  which  Mr.  Hogg  has  sent  tis,  so  in  this :  we  have  to  praise  j 
the  typography,  the  paper,  and  the  strong  but  also  ornamental  binding." — 
Manchester  Weekly  Post. 

(20)        London :  John  Hogg,  13,  Paternoster  Row,  EC. 


WITH   RIOHT   ILLUHTRATIONS. 

Fo<irth  edition,  crown  8vo.,  352  pp.,  cloth,  price  Ss.  6(1.  ;  gilt  cdgea,  4b. 

Boys  and  their  Ways:  A  Book  for  and 

about  Boys.    By  One  Who  Knows  Them. 

"  Tlio  tnblo  nf  contontn  Kivoa  nitcli  a  bill  of  fiiro  nn  will  roiulor  tho  Ixiy  Into  whono  linnds 
tliiH  >MH)k  fullH  oii^ur  to  unjoy  tho  fuant  pre]Miru(l  for  lilin.  .  .  .  We  vuiitiiru  to  jirudtct  for 
thin  clmrniiiig  b<M)k  a  poi)ufiirityu(|iiikl  to  '  Hulf-Holp.'  ...  No  Ixittur  nitt  could  Im)  put  Into 
n  )M>y'H  hanuH,  and  it  will  bocuino  a  Httindard  work  for  tho  school  librtiry."— /ScAo<a<(ic 
Wm-ld. 

"  It  is  a  boy's  book  of  tho  best  stylo."— i<6<r(Z«n  Journal, 


WITH   EIGHT  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Third  edition,  crown  8vo.,  852  pp.,  cloth,  price  3b.  6d. ;   gilt  edges,  4b. 

Girls  and  their  Ways:  A  Book  for  and 

about  Girls.    By  One  who  Knows  Tuem. 

"  It  aims  high,  and  it  hits  the  mtiTk."— Literary  IVorld. 

"  A  lonK  list  of  books  is  given  both  for  study  and  amusement.  This  list  is  selected  with 
care  and  witliout  prejudice,  and  should  prove  a  Kreat  asHistance  to  Kirls  in  doubt  what  to 

read It  is  a  sensible  and  well-written  book,  full  of  infoimation  and  wholesome 

thoughts  for  and  about  Kirls."— .S't.  Jame»'»  Budget. 

"Home  duties,  amusement,  social  claims,  and  appropriate  literature,  are  subjects  succes- 
•Ively  treated,  and  treated  with  both  knowledKe  and  sound  judgment."— i'ait  Mali,  Uaaette. 


WITH   KIOHT  PORTRAITS. 

Dedicated  by  permission  to  the  lit.  Hon.  W.  E.  GLADSTONE,  M.P.,  etc. 
Sixth  edition,  crown  8vo.,  384  pp.,  cloth,  price  3s.  6d. ;  gilt  edges,  4s. 

Plain  Living  and  High  Thinking;  or, 

Practical  Self-Culture  :  Moral,  Mental,  and  PhysicaT    By  W. 
H.  Davenport  Adams,  Author  of  "The  Secret  of  Success,"  etc. 

"  We  like  the  thorough  way  in  which  Mr.  Adams  deals  witii '  Self-Culture :  Moral,  Mental, 
and  i'hysical.'    His  chapter  on  the  courtesies  of  home  life,  and  the  true  relation  between 

parent  and  child,  is  suecially  valuable  nowadays ilecertainly  answers  the  question, 

'Is  life  worth  living?  in  a  most  triumphant  atllrmative."— t/ruv/ik. 

"  liooks  for  young  men  are  constantly  appearing- some  of  them  genuine,  earnest,  and 
useful,  and  many  i  them  mere  products  of  the  art  of  book-making.  We  have  pleasure  in 
sayinjt  that  this  Vi  .ume  bv  Mr.  Adams  deserves  to  take  its  place  among  the  best  of  the  first- 
mentioned  class.  It  is  fresh,  interesting,  varied,  and,  above  all,  full  of  common-aunse, 
manliness,  and  right  principle."— in vcrne.s.s  Courier. 

"  Young  men  who  wish  to  make  something  of  themselves  should  invest  seven  sixpences  in 
this  most  valuable  volume."— .Sworrf  and  Trowel. 

"  A  better  book  of  tlie  class  in  all  respects  we  have  seldom  had  the  pleasure  to  notice.  .  . 
We  cannot  too  strongly  recommend  it  to  young  men."— F.  M.  C.  A.  Monthly  Notes. 


Medium  16mo.,  bevelled  boards,  gilt  edges,  interleaved,  432  pp.,  price  Ss.  6d. 

The  Birthday-Book  of  Art  and  Artists. 

Compiled  and  Edited  by  Estelle  Davenport  Adams,  Editor 
of  "  Rose  Leaves,"  "  Flower  and  Leaf,"  etc. 

"  Few  of  the  infinite  variety  of  birthday 
books  have  been  planned  more  ingeniously, 
or  to  more  useful  purpose,  than  this,  which 


oufifht  to  secure  a  large  share  of  the  popu* 
lanty  lavished  on  these  pretty  manuals.  — 
Glangow  Herald. 


Ascott  R.  Hope's  Books. 

See  page  14. 


9  vols.  Ss.  6d.  each. 


"  Mr.  Hogg  is  a  famous  caterer  in  the  way  of  books  for  youth.  All  his 
books  are  excellent  of  their  class  ;  they  are  amply  illustrated,  and  it  seems  as 
though  Mr.  Hogg  had  resolved  to  be  the  special  caterer  in  healthy  literature 
for  the  youngsters,  and  his  publications  are  well  adapted  to  the  various  stages 
of  youth  of  both  sexes."— Indian  Daily  News. 


London:  John  Hogg,  13,  Paternoster  Bow,  E.O. 


(21) 


I 


^f:'  i 


pi 

I* 

i 


11  lr\ 


PROVERB  STORIES  FOR  BOYS  AND  GIRLS, 

Small  orown  8vo.,  oluth,  256  pp.,  with  36  IlluHtrationH,  2b.  6<1.  ;  gilt  udgea,  3s. 

Every  Cloud    has   its   Silver  Lining, 

ana  otlior  Proverb  StorieH  for  UoyH  and  Girls.     First  Senos. 
By  Mks.  UiDDEhL,  Mks.  Douglas,  M.  J.  Orkiii,  and  others. 
Small  crown  8vo.,  cloth,  256  pp.,  with  33  IlIuHtrationH,  2h.  Qii.  ;  gilt  udguH,  Ss. 

One    Tiling    at   a    Time,    and    other 

Proverb  Stories  for  Boys  and  Girls.    Second  Series.    By  Etiikl 
CoxoN,  Mks.  Douglas,  Madame  Colomii,  and  other  Authors. 

"Onplt-U  pHzo books,  with  plontlful  lllun 
tratloiiH. "— SfAoof  Board  Chronicle. 

"  TheHo  volumuB  uro  very  good." — Littr 
ary  World, 


'  The  Htorloa  are  generally  cxcollont,  and 
arc  ploutlfully  illuMtratod."— ^Scotaman. 


"  ricaHant  \^\li  books  for  boyH  and  ffirlH." 
—  York*  (Jazctte,  [Kxamimr. 

"  Thoroughly  BatlHfnctory."— 3^^l(7l^^^)• 

"Well  and  briskly  told."—  rati  Mull 
Gaztttt.  [inan, 

"The  Idea  in  excellent." — Litirary  Church' 


WITH   SIX   POIITRAITS. 

Second  edition,  small  crown  8vo.,  cloth,  288  pp.,  price  28.  6d.  ;  gilt  edges,  Ss. 

Plodding    On;    or.   The  Jog-trot   to 

Fame  and  Fortune.  Illustrated  by  the  Life-Stories  of  Gkoroe 
Peadody,  Robert  Chambers,  T.  Brassey,  and  others.  By 
Henry  Curwen,  Author  of  "  A  History  of  Booksellers,"  etc. 

"  A  nplondid  book  for  Iwys  and  yonng  men,  illustrating  the  way  in  wliich  succcswful 
men  have  triumnhed  over  early  dinadvantjigc8,  and  have  arrived  at  a  great  and  good  name 
and  ample  wealth  by  quiet  perBeveranco  in  the  path  of  A^ity. "—Dundct  Courier. 

Small  crown  8vo.,  288  pp.,  cloth,  price  "     6d.  j  gilt  edges,  3h. 

The  Shoes  of  Fortune,       i  other  Fairy 

Tales.  By  Hans  Christian  Andersen.  With  a  Biographical 
Sketch  of  the  Author,  a  Portrait,  and  Twenty-seven  Illustra- 
tions by  Otto  Speckter  and  others. 

•'This  beautifully  illustrated  edition  of  Andersen's  exquisite  stories  is  sure  to  be  n 
favourite  with  all  young  people  who  become  its  fortunate  possessors.  The  biographical 
fiketoh  is  admirably  written.  —S/i<^<W  Independent. 

Small  crown  8vo.,  288  PP-«  cloth,  price  2s.  6d. ;  gilt  edges,  3s. 

Far-Famed  Tales  from  the  Arabian 

Nights  Entertainments.    Illustrated  with  Seventy-eight  wood; 
Engravings,  and  carefully  revised  for  Young  Readers. 

"  The  print  is  good,  there  is  a  profusion  of  good  illuBtratlons,  and  the  volume  may  be  1 
thoroughly  recommended  as  well  supplying  an  acknowledged  want  of  a  selection  of  the 
most  familiar  of  the  stories  from  the  '  Arabian  Nights,'  in  a  form  fit  for  childish  reading."  ] 
— Qvuirdian. 


Facts   and    Phases   of   Aninnal    Life. 
Wonderful  Aninnals.  ^s.Qd.eacL  ^^^JP^Ol}:^' 

*'  The  peculiarity  of  Mr.  Hogg  is  that  all  Ins  jmhlicalions  have  a  healthyX 
moral  tone,  whilst  most  of  them  are  eminently  calculated  beneficially  to  im- 1 
press  the  minds  of  both  sexes.  Commercially,  the  publisher  attaches  to  thtm\ 
a  very  modest  value ;  mentally  and  morally,  the  vaiue  cannot  be  estimated." — j 

LlNCOLNSHIRK  FrEK  PrESS. 


(^2)       London :  John  Hogg,  13,  Paternoster  Bow,  E.O. 


fiS. 

t)d^eBi  3b. 

ling, 

^i  Series. 
othcrH. 
etlgoH,  3h. 

Dther 

ly  Kthel 
Authors. 

H  iuul  Kirl8." 
[Hxnminer. 
—ManehenUr 
-  I'all  Mull 
\iiK(n. 
rary  Church- 


t  edges,  38. 

ot  to 

f  Gkorue 
therft.  By 
era,"  etc. 

;h   StlCCCHHful 

ml  good  uame 
itr. 

,  3fl. 

[Fairy 

ographical 
lUustra- 

suro  to  bo  n 
I  biographical 

3s. 

abian 

ight  wood 


lumo  may  bo 
ection  of  tlio  ] 
iflh  reading." 


Life. 

he  a  healthy^ 
[ally  to  in 
hes  to  them] 
ated." — • 


Siicoiid  Kditiun, 
Crown  8vo.,  cloth  (4  ooluurs  and  gold),  price  28.  6d.  |  gilt  edgos,  3«. 

Brave  Little  Women.    Tales  of  the  Heroism 

of  Girls.    Founded  on  Fact.    By  Marik  Trkvklyan,  Author  of 
"  The  Spectre  Boatman,"  etc.  IlluRtnited  by  W.  H.  Petiikrick. 

"May  bo  placed  in  tho  flrst  rank  us  a  I  "  Will  hu  wulcoiiiod  ut  every  flruoide,"— 
book  lor  yoxiin;  tulk."—  Brighton  Herald,         \    Shtjjidd  Indtpendenl. 

Crown  8vo.,  cloth  (4  colours  and  gold),  prico  2h.  (Jd.  ;  gilt  odg'>8,  38. 

Ada  Norman's  Trials  and  Difficulties. 

A  Story  for  Girls.     By  M.  Sioymour,  Author  of  '*  Dethroned," 
•'Two  and  Two,"  etc.    With  Illustrations  by  O.  L.  Thomas. 

"  Ada  ia  n  genuine  girl.  .  .  .  Tlio  entire  utury  In  full  of  valiublu  HUggoMtioUM  for  gir 
readers." — Littrary  World.  [Aid, 

"A  Bplondid  book.  ...  It  doservoH  a  foremo.st  i)laco  in  every  hcIiooI  library." — Ttw.htr't 

Second  edition,  crown  8vo.,  cloth,  bevellud  bnardH,  price  2m.  6d. 

Fortunate    Men:     How    they    made 

Money  and  Won  ilonown.     With  Portrait  of  N.  M.  do  Ilotlischild. 

"The  real  value  of  its  contents  conHists  in  itH  asRertinK  tlie  clalinn  to  reflpect  of  virtues, 
■uch  aa  peraeverance,  metliod,  and  punctuality,  whiuli  are  often  con^eniptuouNly  treated,  but 
wliich  are  invaluable,  wliettier  for  niakiuK  money  or,  which  ia  much  more  important,  for 
formation  of  character.    We  wlah  the  book  aucct'sa."— WifWf/oiM  Herald. 

"  Tliere  are  naaaaKea  anionx  theae  aelectiona  which  are  worthv  to  be  inacribud  in  braaa  in 
every  place  of  Duaiueaa.  Every  young  man  may  read  thia  book  with  profit."— .Swoni  and 
JVowel. 


WITH   THIltTY   1LLU8THAT10N8. 

Crown  8vo.,  288  pp.,  cloth,  price  28.  6d.  ;  gilt  edgeH,  38. 

The  Burgomaster's  Daughter,  and  other 

stories.     By  W.  H.  G.  King.stcn,  M.  E.  Siijim.icy,  GEitTRUDE 
Crockford,  and  others.     With  Tliree  Coloured  Plates,  Six  Full- 
page  Woodcuts,  and  Twenty-one  Illustrations  in  the  text. 
"  A  capital  book  for  both  boya  and  kMs."— Stationery  and  liookaellina. 


WITH   THIHTY-FOUU  ILLUHTUATIONS. 

Crown  8vo.,  288  pp.,  cloth,  price  2h.  6d.  ;  g'lt  edges,  Ss. 

Gilbert's  First  Voyage,  and  other  Stories. 

By  M.  C.  Halifax,  Thomas  Miller,  Frances  II.  Wood,  and 
others.  With  Three  Coloured  Plates,  Six  Full-page  Woodcuts, 
and  Twenty-five  Illustrations  in  the  text. 

"A  pleasant  voluine,  in  whicli  youngsters  will  And  a  variety  of  entertainment."— Daiij/i 
Chronicle. 


irn 


ILLU8TRATKD   BY   C.  A.  DOYLR. 

Crown  8vo.,  288  pp.,  cloth,  price  28.  6d.  ;  gilt  edges,  38. 

The    Steady  Aim :    A  Book  of  Examples  and 

Encouragements  from  Modern  Biography.  By  W.  H.  Daven- 
port Adams,  Author  of  "  The  Secret  of  Success,"  etc.  A  New, 
Revised,  and  Cheaper  Edition,  Illustrated  by  C.  A.  Doyle. 

"  Splendid  reading."— Li^pran/  World. ____^ 

_  n7LUOTiiATEinJY~GE01tGE  CRUIKSHANK. 

Crown  8vo.,  256  pp.,  cloth,  price  28.  6d. ;  gilt  edgea,  3^. 

Out  and  About:  A  Boy's  Adventures. 

By  J.  Hain  Friswell,  Author  of  "  Footsteps  to  Fame,"  etc.   New, 
Revised,  and  Cheaper  Edition,  Illustratoil  by  George  Cruikshank. 
"It  can  hold  its  own  as  a  bracing,  spirited,  exciting,  and  instructive  story."  -Neivr.astle 
Chronicle. 

London :  John  Hogg,  13,  Paternoster  Bow,  £.C.      i2'6) 


v:l.r 


1*1 


NEW  AND  CHEAPER  EDITIONS  OF  POPULAR  BOOKS. 

In  New  and  Handsome  Cloth  Bindings,  2s.  6d.  each  ;  gilo  edges,  3s.  each. 

The  Habits  of  Good  Society:  A  Hand- 
book of  Etiquette  for  Ladies  and  Gentlemen.  With  Thoughts, 
Hints,  and  t  Anecdotes  concerning  Social  Observances,  Nice 
Points  of  Taste  and  Good  Manners,  and  the  Art  of  Making 
One's  Self  Agreeable.  The  whole  interspersed  with  Humorous 
Illustrations  of  Social  Predicaments,  Remarks  on  the  History 
and  Changes  of  Fashion,  aud  the  Differences  of  English  and 
Continental  Etiquette. 

Famous  London  Merchants  :  A  Book 

for  Boys.  By  H.  R.  Fox  Bourne,  author  of  "English 
Merchants,"  *'  English  Seamen  under  the  Tudors,"  etc.  With 
Twenty-four  Illustrations. 

Watchers  for  the  Dawn,  and  other 

studies  of  Christian  Character.  By  Mrs.  W.  R.  Lloyd,  author 
of  "  Pictures  of  Heroes  and  Lessons  from  their  Lives,"  etc. 
With  Illustrations  by  James  Godwin. 

Adventures  in  the  Ice:  A  Compre- 
hensive Summary  of  Arctic  Exploration,  Discovery,  and  Adven- 
ture. Including  experiences  of  Captain  Penny,  the  Veteran 
Whaler,  now  first  published.  By  John  Tillotson,  author  of 
"  Stories  of  the  Wars,"  "  Our  Untitled  Nobility,"  etc.  With 
P<  irtraits  and  other  Illustrations. 

Pioneers  of  Civilization.    By  John  Tillotson, 

Author  of  "  Adventures  in  the  Ice,"  etc.  A  New,  Cheaper  aud 
Revised  Edition,  with  an  Additional  Chapter.  With  Eleven 
Illustrations. 

Contents.— The  Soldier.— The  Adventurer.— The  Explorer. —The 
Man  of  Peace.— The  Trader.— The  Settler.— The  Missiouary.— 
Recent  Pioneers. 

Small  Beginnings;  or,  The  Way  to  Get 

On.  A  New  and  Cheajjcr  Edition.  With  Eight  Illustrationd  by 
C.  A.  Doyle. 

From  the  acorn  springs  the  oak  ;  "  despise  not  the  day  of  small  things."  The 
biographical  sketches  collected  in  this  volume  show  to  what  heights  the  earnest 
may  aspire  from  the  humblest  beginuiugs :  —  John  Walter  from  a  pruiter's 
apprentice  rises  to  be  proprietor  of  The  Times;  Brotherton  from  a  factory-boy 
to  sit  as  a  respected  member  iu  the  House  of  Commons.  The  other  examples 
include— Sir  Jamsetjee  Jejeebhoy,  George  Heriot,  Wedgwood  and  Minton, 
Girard,  John  Leyden,  Francis  Drake,  Dupuytreu,  Lafltte,  Montgomery,  Breguet, 
and  David  Wilkie. 

1^  The  2/6  Series  now  number.^  24  Vols.,  see  Catalofjue. 


jn^ 


"  Mr,  Hogg  is  to  be  congratulated  on  the  healthy  moral  tone  of  his  puhlica- 
<iow5."— Rkv.  C.  H.  C'"-'i.oKON. 


(24)        London :  Jolin  Hogg,  13,  Paternoster  Bow,  E.O. 


blorer.— The 
issiouary.— 


LEAVINQ  THE  WRECK, 


SPBOIMBM  ILLUSTRATION 

From  "  Gilbert's  First  Voya<je  "  (2«.  Gd.  Books). 


(25) 


w 


III  \ 


\ 


,r 


tn  crown  8vo.,  288  pp.,  cluth,  price  'Js.  OJ.  ;  gilt  ed<{es,  ^s. 

WITH    THKKK   OOLOUUEI^    l'f,ATK.S,     SIX     I'ULL-I'AGK     WOODCUTS,     ANM)    TWENTY 

ILLUSTRATIONS    IN   THE   TEXT. 

Phil  Thorndyke's  Adventures,  and  other 

stories.     By  F.  M.  Wilbraiiam,  E.  M.  Piper,  Lady  Ciiari,i:s 
TiiYNNE,  and  others. 


"  a  budget  admirably  calculated  to  hold 
younger  readers  spell-bound." — Yorkslurc 
Post. 


"An  excellent  collection.  The  volume 
deserves  to  have  a  largo  sale." — Dumkc 
Cnurier. 


In  crown  Svo.,  288  pp.,  cloth,  price  2s.  6d. ;  gilt  edges,  3s. 

WITH  THREE    COLOURED    PLATES,    SIX    FULL- PAGE     WOODCUTS,     AND    TWENTY 

ILLUSTRATIONS   IN   THE   TEXT. 

The  Story  of  Herbert  Archer,  and  other 

Tales.    By  Lady  Charles  Tiiynne,  Amy  Key,  Mrs.  Russell 


Gray,  and  others. 

"  Well  supplied  with  excitement;  with  a 
certain  historical  element."— yori«.  Post. 


"  Rendered    more    attractive   by   good 
illustrations." — Aberdeen  Journal. 


A   HANDBOOK   OF   REFERENCE   AND   QUOTATION. 

Mottoes  and  Aphorisms  from  Shake- 
speare :  Alphabetically  arranged  ;  with  a  Copious  Index  of 
9,000  References  to  the  infinitely  varied  Words  and  Ideas  of 
the  Mottoes.  Any  word  or  idea  can  be  traced  at  once,  and  the 
correct  quotation  (with  name  of  play,  act,  and  scene)  had 
without  going  further.  Second  edition,  fcap.  8vo.,  cloth,  price  2s.  6d. 
"  The  collection  is,  we  believe,  unique  of  its  kind."— Oj;/or(i  Times. 

"  The  writer  who  deliKhts  now  and  then  to  embellish  his  productions  by  some  of  the  well- 
pointed  aTi(l  tellins  mottoes  and  aphorisms  from  Shakespeare  has  here  a  most  valuable  book 
of  reference."— Y(>c/,>/i ice  Gazette. 

Fourth  edition  of  a  new  and  enlarged  edition,  fcap.  8vo.,  cloth,  price  2s.  6d. 

A  Practical  Guide  to  Enghsh  Versifica- 
tion, with  a  Compendious  Dictionary  of  Rhymes,  an  Examina- 
tion of  Classical  Measures,  and  Comments  upon  Burl'^sque  and 
Comic  Verse,  Vers  de  Societe,  and  Song  Writing.  By  Tom  Hood. 
"  A  dainty  little  book  on  English  verse-making.    The  Dictionary  of  Rhymes  will  be  found 
one  of  the  most  complete  and  practical  in  our  lanKuape."— i''re(;7;ian. 

"  Alike  to  the  tyro  in  versifying,  the  student  of  literature,  and  the  genera)  leaaer,  this 
guide  can  be  confldently  recommended."— .SVt)t.s?))a?t.  

Red  Line  Edition  (the  Fourth),  with  Illustrations,  quarto,  price  2l8. 

CAREFULLY   REVISED,    WITH   NUMEROUS  EMENDATIONS. 

The  Directorium    Anghcanum:    Being  a 

Manual  of  Directions  for  the  Right  Celebration  of  the  Holy 
Communion,  for  the  saying  of  Matins  and  Evensong,  etc.,  ac- 
cording to  ancient  uses  of  the  Church  of  England.  Edited  by 
the  Rev.  Frederick  George  Lee,  D.C.L.,  F.S.A. 

"  The  existence  of  one  such  work  of  credit  and  reputation  must  do  something  to  diminish 
the  varieties  of  Ritualism  into  which  the  tastes  or  studies  of  independent  explorers  miglit 
lead  them."— Gitardtan. 


Crown  8vo.,  cloth  extra,  bevelled  boards,  price  7s.  6d. 

The  Manuale  Clericorum.    A  Guide  for  the 

Reverent  and  Decent  Celebration  of  Divine  Service,  the  Holy 
Sacrament,  etc.  Abridged  from  the  "  Directorium  Anglicanum." 
With  Additions  of  Special  Value.     Edited  by  Rev.  F.  G.  Lee. 


(26) 


London :  John  Hogg,  13,  Paternoster  Bow,  E.O. 


(   I 


rWENTY 


)ther 

!iiAiu-i:s 


lie  volume 

" — Dundu 


TWENTY 

other 

RUSSliLL 


by   good 


■a. 


hake- 
Index  of 
Ideas  of 
i,  and  the 
iene)  had 
rice  2s.  6d. 

!  of  the  well- 
iluable  book 

ce  28.  6d. 

sifica- 

Examina- 

sque  and 

)M  Hood. 
ill  be  found 

leaaer,  this 
e2l8. 

ing  a 

the  Holy 
;,  etc.,  ac- 
Mited  by 


to  diminish 
orers  uiiglit 


)r  the  I 

3  Holy  te 
iicanum."  | 
1 G.  Lee.    I 


SPKCiMEN   ILLUSTRATION   FROM    "CHILDREN'S   EVERGREENS," 

In  the  New  Is.  6rf.  Series  for  Juveniles. 


(27) 


r 


i! 


New  Dlnstrated  is.  6d.  Jnyeiiile  Book 

Attractively  bound  in  the  New  and  Effective  Chromatic  Style  (Four  Colours 
and  Gold).     Crown  8vo.,  192  pp.,  cloth,  price  1b.  6d.  each. 

1.  Little  Neighbours  in  London.    A  Story  for  Young 

Readers.     By  E.  C.  IIickards,  Author  of  **  A  Strange  Exhibition," 
etc.    With  Illustrations  by  J.  Jellicoe.    Third  Edition. 

2.  The  Wondrous  Tale  of  Oocky,  Olucky,  and  Cackle. 

Translated  by  C.  W.  Heckethorn.  Illustrated  by  H.W.  Petherick. 

3.  "If  Wishes  were  Horses,  Beggars  would  Ride." 

A  Tale  for  Young  Folk.     By  M.    Seymour,  Author  of   "Little 
Arthur  at  the  Zoo,"  etc.   Illustrated  by  K.  J.  Key.    Second  Edition. 

4.  A  Strange  Exhibition,  and  other  Tales  for  the 

Young.    By  E.   C.   Rickards,  Aiithor  of   "Little  Foighbours  in 
London,"  etc.     Illustrated  by  H.  W.  Petherick.    Second  Edition. 

5.  An  Easy  Guide  to  Scripture  Animals.    See  imge  12. 

6.  That  Boy  Jack  I     A  Story  for  Young  Folk.     By  Helen 

H.  Rogers,  Author  of  "  An  Old- World  Story."    With  Illustrations 
by  A.  Hitchcock.    Second  Edition. 

7.  A  Living  S^ory;  or,  The  Would-be  Authoress. 

A  Tale  for  Boys  and  Girls.    By  A.  W.  Wright.     With  Illustrations 
by  O.  L.  Thomas.    Second  Edition. 

8.  Red  Herring;  or,  Allie's  Little  Blue  Shoes.     A 

Tale  for  Young  Readers.      By  Frances  Armstrong,  Author  of 
"Noel  and  Geoff,"  etc.    Illustrated  by  O.  L.  Thomas.  Second  Edition. 

9.  Children's  Evergreens.     A  Selection  of  Fifteen  of  the  Old 

Favourite  Tales.      With  Fifty  Illustrations.    Third  Edition. 

10.  Noel  and  Geofif;  or,  Three  Christmas  Days.    A 

Story  for  Children.     By  Frances  Armstrong,  Author  of  "lied 
Herring,"  etc.     With  Illustrations  by  H.  W.  Petherick. 

11.  Songs  and  Poems  for  Children.    Edited  by  Carrie 

Davenport.    With  Sixty  Illustrations  by  T.  Sidney  Cooper,  R.  A., ; 
J.  C.  HoRSLEY,  R.A.,  T.  Webster,  R.A.,  and  others. 

12.  Meg  and  Olive;  or,  Life  at  the  Grey  House.    Byj 

M.  Rickards,  Author  of  "  The  Boy  who  was  not  Wanted."    With 
Illustrations  by  0.  L.  Thomas. 

13.  The  Boys  of  Priors  Dean.    By  PnojiE  Allen,  Author  j 

of  '*  Matchbox  Phil,"  etc.     With  Illustrations  by  H.  W.  rEXHEitiCK. 

14.  A  Tale  told  by  Two.    By  li.  E.  Tiddeman,  Author  ofj 

•*  Prim's  Story,"  etc.     Illustrated  by  O.  L.  Thomas. 

15.  Up  in  thG  Old  Pear  Tree.    A  Holiday  Story.    By  S.  P. 

Akmstkong,  Author  of  "  Pop  and  Peggy,"  "  Dolly's  Adventuits,"  etc. 
Illustrated  by  H.  W.  Petherick. 

"Admirably  adapted  for  rewards,  the  more  so  as  the  children  will  appreciate  the  works] 
on  their  own  merits.    Their  ' get  up '  is  unexceptionable." — Britiih  Mail. 

19"  Others  in  Preparation. 


f 


(28) 


London:  John  Hogg,  13,  Paternoster  Bow,  £.0. 


Ite  the  works  j 


r,-^X  r- 


f^«WiK- 


jim's  discovery  in  the  ice  plain. 
SPECIMEN   ILLUSTRATION 

From  •'  That  Boy  Jack"  (Is.  Qd.  Juv&nihs). 


(29) 


u 


!■-.   J 


New  Illnstrated  Slling  JuTenile  Books. 

Attractively  bound  in  the  New  and  Effective  Chromatic  Style  (Four  Colours 
and  Gold).    Small  crown  8vo.,  128  pp.,  cloth,  price  Is.  each. 

1.  We  Four  Children.    By  M.  A.  Hoyer,  Author  of  "A 

Canterbury  Tale,"  etc.     With  a  Frontispiece  by  R.  J.  Key,  and  other 
Illustrations.     Second  Edition. 

2.  The  Ups  and  Downs  of  a  Sixpence.    By  M.  SEYi\rouR, 

Author   of   "  If   Wishes   were   Horses,"   etc.      Illustrated   by  0.    L. 
Thomas.     Third  Edition. 

3.  Dolly's  Adventures ;  or,  Happy  Days  at  Cranberry. 

By  Yvonne,  Author  of  •'  Pop  and  Peggy,"  etc.     Illustrated  by  K.  ,J. 
Key.     Third  Edition. 

4.  Exiled ;  or,  When  Great-Grandmother  was  Young. 

By  C.    M.    MacSorley,    Author   of   "  A   Few   Good  Women,"  etc. 
Illustrated  by  O.  L.  Thomas.     Second  Edition. 

5.  Under  the  Walnut  Tree :  Stories  told  by  the  Birds. 

By  Frances  Armstuong,  Author  of  "  lied  Herring,"  etc.     Illustrated 
by  H.  W.  Petherick  ar  d  others.    Second  Edition. 

6.  Little  King  I :  j±  Story  for  Young  Readers.    By 

Louisa  Emily  Dobuee,  Author  of  "  Turned  to  Gold,"  etc.     Illustrated 
by  OsMAN  Thomas.     Second  Edition. 

7.  The  Fortun3s  of  Ruby,  Pearl,  and  Diamond.    By 

Frances  Armstrong,  Author  of  "  Nciel  and  Geoff,"  etc.     Illustrated 
by  A.  BoucHiTTE  and  otliers.     Third  Edition. 

8.  A    Canterbury  Tale.    By  M.  A.  Hoyer.    Author  of 

"  We  Four  Children,"  etc.     Illustrated  by  H.  Evans. 

9.  Father  Christmas's  Stories.    By  Louise  Alice  Riley. 

Illustrated  by  E.  W.  de  Guerin. 

10.  Cousin  Deb.      A  Story  for  Children.     By  Alice  Gar- 

land.   Illustrated  by  O.  Thomas. 

1 1 .  Black  and  White.     An  Anglo-Indian  Story  for  Children. 

By  Gkraldine  Butt,  Author  of  "Christmas  Roses,"  "Esther,"  etc. 
Illustrated  by  Harry  Evans. 

1 2.  The  Palace  of  Ideas.    By  Louise  Alice  Eiley,  Author 

of  "  Father  Christmas's  Stories."     Illustrated  by  Robert  Buxton. 

13.  Uncle    Tom's    Cabin.     Abridged   for   Young  Readers. 

With  Illustrations. 

14.  Plucky  Rex  ;    or,  the  Secret  of  the  Mine.     A 

Tale  of  Pengarvan  Bay.    By  F.  M.  Holmes,  Author  of  "  Jack  Marston's 
Anchor,"  etc.     With  Illustrations  by  W.  Rainey. 

15.  The  Lad  from  London.    By  Ascott  R.  Hope,  Author 

of   "Stories  of  Young  Adventurers,"  "Redskin  and  Paleface,"  etc. 
Illustrated  by  Harold  Copping. 

MSB"  Others  in  preparation.    {See  page  4.) 

*•  A  glimpse  through  Mr.  Hogg's  catalogue  shows  how  admirably  he  caters 
for  the  young  of  both  sexes." — Wolvbrhampton  Chronicle. 


I      I 


(30) 


London :  John  Hogg,  13,  Paternoster  Bow,  E.O. 


;  ■ 
/   , 


ooks. 


ir  Colours 
I, 

'  of  "A 

and  other 

EYMOUR, 
by  0.    L. 

a  berry. 

i  by  K.  J. 

Young. 

nen,"  etc. 

3  Birds. 

Illustrated 

jrs.    By 

Illustrated 

Qd.     By 

Illustrated 

uthor  of 

E  UlLEY. 
CE  GAR- 

Jhildren. 

ther,"  etc. 

,  Author    p 
IxTON,  'i: 

iKeaders.    !• 

r 

ine.     A  I 

iMarston's    |' 

Author 
lace,"  etc. 


he  caters 


f'i 


SPKCIMEX  ILLUSTRATION 

From  the  New  Shilling  Series  for  Juveniles. 


(31) 


r  I 


!    I 


I  h 


A    TRILOGY    OF    BOOKS    ABOUT   WALES. 

ITS  HISTORY,  LEGENDS,  FOLK-LORE,  Etc. 
By    MABIE    TREVELYAN. 

Dedicated  by  OraciovA  Permiaaion  to 
Her  Royal  Highneaa  the  DUCHESS  OF  YORK. 

1.  Glimpses  of  We?sh  Life  and  Character. 


Crown  8vo.,  408  pages,  vellum  cloth, 

"There  are  stories  of  ancient  super- 
stitious and  customs,  of  poets  and  musi- 
cinns,  of  pioneers  of  dissent,  of  eccentric 
persons,  of  folk-lore  and  ghosts,  some  of 
which  are  new  to  us,  and,  new  or  old,  are 
told  in  a  spirited  style.  Spirited  also  are 
the  pictures  of  religious  festivals,  of  the 
old  Welsh  Tory  gentleman,  the  Wo-sh 
farmer,  the  hiring  fair,  the  Eisteddfod, 
and  other  nationa'  products  and  institu- 
tions."— Saturda]/  Review. 


illuminated,  price  68. ;  gilt  edges,  68.  6d. 

"  A  laudable  attempt,  by  means  of  social 
sketches,  pictures  of  character,  legends  and 
traditions,  and  studies  of  folk-lore,  man- 
ners, customs,  and  other  local  characteris- 
tics and  peculiarities,  to  awaken  English 
interest  in  the  land  and  life  of  the  Cymru." 
—  Times. 

" '  Glimpses  of  Welsh  Life  and  Character 
has  been  a  theme  of  admiring  conversation 
since  the  first  day  of  its  appearance.  "~ 
Wettem  Mail,  Cardiff. 

Dedicated  by  permiaaion 
to  The  Right  Honble. 

LORD     WINDSOR, 

Lord  Lieutenant  oj 

Glamorganahire. 

2.  Prom  Snow- 
don  to  the 
Sea:  stirring 

STORIES  of  NORTH 
and  SOUTH  WALES. 

Crown  Svo.,  432  pages, 
cloth,  emblazoned,  price 
6s.  ;  gilt  edges,  6s.  6d. 


"Will  be  read  and  enjoyed  far  beyond 
the  limits  of  the  principality." — Abevdeen 
Free  Frets. 


"Rich  In  the  traditions,  folk-lore,  and 
romances  which  have  been  woven  into 
stories  by  this  able  authoress." — Sheffield 
Independent. 


"This  is  one  of  the  best  collections  of 

Welsh  tales  we  have  yet  scon It  is 

a  book  which  every  lover  of  romance  should 
purchase."— ^«irca«(ie  Chronicle. 

"  Some  of  the  specimens  of  legendary 
lore  are  of  absorbing  interest,  and  the  last 
is  actually  dramatic  in  its  intensity."— 
Weekly  Citizen. 

Dedicated  to  the  Immortal  Memory  of  Llewelyn  ap  Oruffydd, 
laat  Native  Prince  of  Wales. 

3.  The  Land  of  Arthur :  its  Heroes  and 

HEROINES.     Crown  Svo.,  440  pages,  cloth,  illuminated,  price  68.  ; 

gilt  edges,  6s.  6d. 
"  We  warmly  commend  the  book.    Qat  ii  &i  otiqq." —Dundee  Courier. 
"  Full  of  old  world  romance  »nd  chivalry." — Chrittian  Wtrld. 

Her  Majeatythe  QUEEN,— H.R.H.  the  PRINCE  OF  WALES,— H.R.H. 
the  PRINCESS  OF  WALES,— H.R.H.  the  DUCHESS  OF  YORK,— 
H.R.H.  the  DUCHESS  OF  TECK,  have  been  graciously  pleased  to 
aeeept  copiea  of  the  above  boohs. 

(32)       London :  John  Hogg,  13,  Paternoster  Bow,  E.O. 


WALES. 

,  Etc. 


iracter. 

dges,  68.  6d. 

neans  of  social 
er,  legends  and 
olk-lorc,  man- 
al  characteris- 
viiken  English 
»f  thoCymru." 

ind  Character 
g  conversatioa 
.ppearance."— 


oermtssion 
Honhle. 
NDSOR, 
•nant  of 
lahire. 

Snow- 
o   the 

ITIRRING 
3f  NORTH 
I  WALES. 

32  pages, 
•ned,  price 
,  6s.  6d. 

far  beyond 
■." — Ahendeen 

)lk-lore,  and 
woven   into 

a."— Sheffield 

id, 

3  and 

price   68.  ; 


-II.  RH. 
YORK,— 

pleased  to 


0. 


